The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fritiofs Saga, by Esaias Tegner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fritiofs Saga

Author: Esaias Tegner

Posting Date: September 26, 2011 [EBook #8518]
Release Date: July, 2005
[This file was first posted on July 18, 2003]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRITIOFS SAGA ***




Produced by David Starner, Tapio Riikonen and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team









FRITIOFS SAGA

BY
ESAIAS TEGNÉR

Introduction, Bibliography, Notes, and Vocabulary _Edited by_
ANDREW A. STOMBERG




PREFACE.


Ever since the establishment, many years ago, of courses in Swedish in a
few American colleges and universities the need of Swedish texts,
supplied with vocabularies and explanatory notes after the model of the
numerous excellent German and French editions, has been keenly felt.
This need has become particularly pressing the last three years during
which Swedish has been added to the curricula of a large number of high
schools. The teachers in Swedish in these high schools as well as in
colleges and universities have been greatly handicapped in their work by
the lack of properly edited texts. It is clearly essential to the success
of their endeavor to create an interest in the Swedish language and its
literature, at the same time maintaining standards of scholarship that
are on a level with those maintained by other modern foreign language
departments, that a plentiful and varied supply of text material be
furnished. The present edition of Tegnér's Fritiofs Saga aims to be a
modest contribution to the series of Swedish texts that in the most
recent years have been published in response to this urgent demand.

Sweden has since the days of Tegnér been prolific in the creation of
virile and wholesome literary masterpieces, but Fritiofs Saga by Tegnér
is still quite generally accorded the foremost place among the literary
products of the nation. Tegnér is still hailed as the prince of Swedish
song by an admiring people and Fritiofs Saga remains, in popular
estimation at least, the grand national epic.

Fritiofs Saga has appeared in a larger number of editions than any other
Scandinavian work with the possible exception of Hans Christian
Andersen's Fairy Tales. It has been translated into fourteen European
languages, and the different English translations alone number
approximately twenty. In German the number is almost as high. Several
school editions having explanatory notes have appeared in Swedish and in
1909 Dr. George T. Flom, Professor of Scandinavian Languages and
Literature of the University of Illinois edited a text with introduction,
bibliography and explanatory notes in English, designed for use in
American colleges and universities, but the present edition is the first
one, as far as the editor is aware, to appear with an English vocabulary.

Fritiofs Saga abounds in mythological names and terms, as well as in
idiomatic expressions, and the preparation of the explanatory notes has
therefore been a perplexing task. A fairly complete statement under each
mythological reference would in the aggregate reach the proportions of a
treatise on Norse mythology, but the limitations of space made such
elaboration impossible. While brevity of expression has thus been the
hard rule imposed by the necessity of keeping within bounds, it is hoped
that the notes may nevertheless be found reasonably adequate in
explaining the text. Many mythological names occur frequently and in
different parts of the text, and as constant cross references in the
notes would likely be found monotonous, an effort has been made to
facilitate the matter of consulting and reviewing explanatory statements
for these terms by adding an index table.

It has not been thought necessary or desirable to translate many
idiomatic expressions in the text, as the vocabulary ought to enable the
student, without the assistance of a lavish supply of notes, to get at
the meaning. It would seem that the study of a foreign text would be most
stimulating and invigorating to a student, if he himself be given a
chance to wrestle with difficult sentences.

The introduction that precedes the text makes no pretension of being
anything more than an attempt to state in broad outline the salient facts
in the life of Tegnér and in the genesis and development of the Fritiofs
Saga theme.

The text in the present edition has been modernized to conform with the
orthography officially adopted in Sweden in 1906.

This new edition of the great masterpiece is accompanied by the editor's
sincere hope that it may in a measure at least serve to create an
increased interest in the study of the sonorous Swedish language and its
rich literature and give a clearer conception of the seriousness and
strength of Swedish character.

The book owes much to the kindly suggestions and corrections of those
who have examined it in proof or manuscript. Special acknowledgment is
due Professor A. Louis Elmquist of Northwestern University, who carefully
revised the vocabulary, and to Mr. E. W. Olson of Rock Island, Ill.,
whose accuracy and scholarship has been of invaluable assistance
throughout.

University of Minnesota, December, 1913.

A. A. S.




INTRODUCTION.


I.

In the personality of Esaias Tegnér the vigor and idealism of the
Swedish people find their completest and most brilliant incarnation. A
deep love of the grandeurs of nature, keen delight in adventure and
daring deeds, a charming juvenility of spirit that at least in the prime
of his life caused him to battle bravely and hopefully for great ideas, a
clearness of perception and integrity of purpose that abhor shams and
narrow prejudices and with reckless frankness denounce evils and abuses,
a disposition tending at times to brooding and melancholy, all these
elements, combined in Tegnér, have made him the idealized type of the
Swedish people. He was cast in a heroic mold and his countrymen continue
to regard him as the completed embodiment of their national ideals. And
in the same measure that Tegnér stands forth as an expression of Swedish
race characteristics it may be said that Fritiofs Saga is the
quintessence of his own sentiments and ideals.

Tegnér, according to his own words, "was born and reared in a remote
mountain region where nature herself composes noble but wild music, and
where the ancient gods apparently still wander about on winter evenings."
His ancestry went back for several generations through the sturdy bonde
class, though his father was a preacher and his mother the daughter of a
preacher. The father's people dwelt in the province of Småland and the
mother's ancestors had lived in the picturesque province of Värmland. The
future poet was born on the 13 of November, 1782, at Kyrkerud, Värmland,
his father holding a benefice in that province. While he was yet a mere
child of nine the father died and the family was left in poverty. A
friend of the Tegnér family, the judicial officer Branting, gave the
young Esaias a home in his house. The lad soon wrote a good hand and was
given a desk and a high, three-legged chair in the office. Branting took
a fancy to the young clerk and soon fell into the habit of inviting him
to accompany the master upon the many official journeys that had to be
made through the bailiwick. Thus Esaias came to see the glories of nature
in his native province, and deep and lasting impressions were left upon
his mind. His quick imagination was further stirred by the heroic sagas
of the North, in the reading of which he at times became so absorbed that
the flight of the hours or the passing events were entirely unnoticed by
him.

Branting, who had become convinced that his young clerk was by nature
endowed for a much higher station than a lowly clerkship offered,
generously provided Esaias with an opportunity for systematic study. In
1796 he wrote a good friend in whose home an elder brother of Esaias was
then acting as tutor, suggesting that the younger brother be given a home
there also and thus have the advantage of the brother's tutelage. A ready
acquiescence meeting this proposal, Esaias now went to Malma, the home of
Captain Löwenhjelm, and at once plunged into the study of Latin, French
and Greek under the brother's guidance. Independently of the instructor
he at the same time acquired a knowledge of English and read principally
the poems of Ossian, which greatly delighted him.

The following year the elder brother accepted a more profitable position
as tutor in the family of the great iron manufacturer Myhrman at Rämen in
Värmland and thither Esaias accompanied him. Here he could drink deep
from the fountain of knowledge for at Rämen he found a fine library of
French, Latin and Greek classics. He worked prodigiously and this,
coupled with a remarkably retentive memory, enabled him to make
remarkably rapid progress in his studies. He would have remained in the
library all the time poring over his dear classic authors but for the
fortunate intervention of the young members of the Myhrman family, seven
in all, who frequently would storm into his room and carry him off by
sheer force to their boisterous frolics. To one of these playmates, Anna
Myhrman, the youngest daughter of the family, he soon became attached by
the tender ties of love.

In 1799 Tegnér was enabled, through the generosity of Branting and
Myhrman, to repair to Lund and enter the university of that place. Here
he made a brilliant record as a student, particularly in the classics,
and after three years he was awarded the master's degree. In recognition
of his remarkable scholarship he was soon after made instructor in
aesthetics, secretary to the faculty of philosophy and assistant
librarian. In 1806 he claimed Anna Myhrman as his bride.

We have the testimony of Tegnér himself that already as a child he began
to write poetry, in fact these efforts began so early in his life that he
could not remember when he for the first time exercised the power that
later was to win him an abiding fame. As early as his clerkship days in
the office of Branting he wrote a poem in Alexandrine verse with the
subject taken from the Old Norse sagas. His numerous productions before
1808 attracted little attention and failed to get any prize for the
young author. But in the above mentioned year he sprang into immediate
popularity by the stirring "War Song of the Scanian Reserves" (Krigssång
för skånska lantvärnet), the Marseillaise of the Swedish nation. Sweden
had just suffered great reverses in war, her very existence as an
independent power seemed to hang in the balance, and confusion and
discouragement were evident on every hand. Then came Tegnér's patriotic
bugle blast, stirring the nation to renewed hope and courage. Speaking
of this poem Professor Boyesen says: "As long as we have wars we must
have martial bards and with the exception of the German Theodore Körner
I know none who can bear comparison with Tegnér. English literature can
certainly boast no war poem which would not be drowned in the mighty
music of Tegnér's 'Svea', 'The Scanian Reserves', and that magnificent
dithyrambic declamation, 'King Charles, the Young Hero'. Tennyson's
'Charge of the Light Brigade' is technically a finer poem than anything
Tegnér has written, but it lacks the deep, virile bass, the tremendous
volume of breath and voice, and the captivating martial lilt which makes
the heart beat willy nilly to the rhythm of the verse" (Essays on
Scandinavian Literature, 233).

The ability evinced by Tegnér as an instructor, but principally the
enthusiasm aroused by his "Song to the Scanian Reserves", gave him in
1810 a call to the Greek professorship at Lund. He did not, however,
enter into this position until 1812.

In the meantime Tegnér had given to his native land the solemn didactic
poem "Svea". In stately Alexandrine verse he scathingly rebukes his
countrymen for their foolish aping after foreign manners and depending
on foreign goods to satisfy their desires. The people, says the poet, can
become strong again only by a return to the simple life and homely
virtues of the great past. Not on the arena of war but through faithful
endeavor in industry, science and art may the Swedish people restore to
their fatherland its former power and glory. As though transported by
this noble thought into a state of ecstasy, the bard then, in the
concluding portion of the poem, pictures in magnificent dithyrambic song
the titanic struggle that ensues and enthrones Peace as the beneficent
ruler of the land. "Svea" won the prize of the Swedish Academy and firmly
established Tegnér in the affection of his countrymen.

The most productive and brilliant period of Tegnér's literary activity is
contemporaneous with his incumbency of the Greek professorship at Lund
(1812-1824). In this period he enriches Swedish literature with a series
of lyrics which still rank among the best both in point of lucidity of
thought and brilliance of diction. Only a few that stand out most
prominently in a list of about one hundred poems from this period can
receive mention here.

The intolerance and bitterness of the reaction that followed close upon
the downfall of Napoleon and found its cruel instrument of oppression in
the Holy Alliance aroused the bitter opposition of Tegnér. His vision was
not obscured, a fate that befell so many in that day, but he saw clearly
the nobility and necessity of tolerance, freedom and democracy. It is to
the great glory of Tegnér that he consistently used his brilliant powers
in battling against the advancing forces of obscurantism and tyranny. His
enlightened and humanitarian ideas find a beautiful utterance in the
poem "Tolerance" (Fördragsamhet) which dates from 1808, but later was
rewritten and appeared under the title "Voices of Peace" (Fridsröster).
In "The Awakened Eagle" (Den vaknade örnen), 1815, he celebrates the
return of Napoleon from Elba, The Union of Norway and Sweden stirs
Tegnér to write a poem "Nore", a high-minded protest against politics of
aggression and a plea for justice and a spirit of fraternity.

In "The New Year 1816" (Nyåret 1816) he scores the Holy Alliance in
bitter and sarcastic terms. The liberal ideas of Tegnér are further
elucidated in a famous address, delivered in 1817 at the celebration of
the three hundredth anniversary of the Lutheran Reformation. In this
event the poet saw the unfolding of the great forces that led to the
spiritual and intellectual emancipation of man, and ushered in a new era
of freedom and progress. The reactionaries in the realm of literature
become the object of his attack in "Epilogue at the Master's
Presentation" (Epilog vid magisterpromotionen). Other poems of this
period, as "The Children of the Lord's Supper" (Nattvardsbarnen),
admirably translated by Longfellow, "Axel", the tragic tale of one of the
warriors of Charles XII., and his fair Russian bride, "Karl XII", which
breathes the defiant spirit not only of the hero king but of the nation,
"Address to the Sun" (Sång till solen), an eloquent eulogy to the
marvelous beauty of the King of Day, merely served to establish Tegnér
more firmly in the affection of the people. But his fame was to be placed
on a still firmer foundation when the greatest creation of his fertile
mind, Fritiofs Saga, appeared.


II.

The genesis of Fritiofs Saga is to be found partly in the renascence of a
strong national sentiment in Sweden after the disastrous wars and loss of
Finland, early in the nineteenth century, partly in Tegnér's personality
and in his profound knowledge and warm admiration of the Old Norse sagas.
We have seen how already as a boy he had read the sagas with keen zest
and even tried his hand at a heroic poem in stately Alexandrine verse.

To the thoughtful minds of that day it seemed clear that the cause of
Sweden's misfortunes was to be found in her loss of a strong manhood, due
to a senseless readiness in adopting enervating foreign customs and to a
fatal relaxation in morals. In 1811 a handful of enthusiastic students,
mostly from Tegnér's native province of Värmland, formed the Gothic Union
(Götiska förbundet) for the purpose of working with united efforts for
the regeneration of the nation. This, they believed, could best be
achieved by reviving the memories of the old Goths, merely another name
for the people of the Saga period, which in turn would help to bring back
the vigorous integrity and dauntless courage of the past. The ancient
sagas must therefore be popularized.

Tegnér, who already in his "Svea" had bewailed the loss of national power
and urged his people to become independent and strong again, joined the
Gothic Union, at the same time expressing his disapproval of a too
pronounced and narrow-minded imitation of old Gothic life and thought.
Erik Gustaf Geijer, the great historian and poet, also a native of
Värmland and in power of mind and loftiness of ideals almost the peer of
Tegnér, published in Iduna, the organ of the Gothic Union, a few poems
that faithfully reproduce the old Northern spirit and in strength and
simplicity stand almost unsurpassed. An extremist in the camp was Per
Henrik Ling, an ardent patriot, who, inspired by Danish and German
Romanticism, would rehabilitate the nation by setting before it in a
series of epics the strong virtues of the past, albeit that these often
appeared in uncouth and brutal forms. For the physical improvement of
his countrymen Ling worked out a scientific system of exercise, and
though his epics were failures, largely because they set up coarse models
for an age that aesthetically had risen superior to them, his system of
physical training entitles him to an honored place among the great men of
Scandinavia.

Tegner had been greatly grieved at Ling's literary mistakes. It seemed
to him deplorable that a worthy cause should be doomed to ignominious
failure just because unskilled hands had undertaken to do the work. This
feeling prompted him to undertake the writing of a great epic based on
the old sagas, but excluding their crudities. But it would be a mistake
to think that this was the only force that impelled him to write. Tegnér
has now reached the heyday of his wonderful poetic powers and he must
give expression to the great ideas that stir his soul. And so he proceeds
to paint a picture of Fritiof the Bold and his times. The great Danish
poet Oehlenschläger had already published "Helge", an Old Norse cycle of
poems which Tegnér warmly admired. This poem revealed to him the
possibilities of the old saga themes in the hands of a master.

Fritiofs Saga did not appear as a completed work at first, but merely in
installments of a certain number of cantos at a time and these not in
consecutive order. In the summer of 1820, cantos 16-19, being the first
installments or "fragments," as Tegnér himself called them, appeared in
Iduna; the five concluding cantos were completed and published two years
later, and not until then did the poet proceed to write the first part.
The work was finally completed in 1825.

Although the first cantos published had received a most enthusiastic
reception on the part of the people and won unstinted praise from most of
the great literary men, even from many who belonged to opposing literary
schools, an enthusiasm that grew in volume and sincerity as the
subsequent portions appeared, Tegnér became increasingly dissatisfied and
discouraged because of the task that confronted him and the serious
defects that he saw in his creation. Tegnér was at all times his own
severest critic and there is found in him an utter absence of vanity or
illusion. "Speaking seriously", he wrote in 1824, "I have never regarded
myself as a poet in the higher significance of the word. -- -- -- I am at
best a John the Baptist who is preparing the way for him who is to come."
[Tegnér, Samlade Skrifter, II, 436.]


III.

As the basis for Tegnér's epic lies the ancient story of Fritiof the
Bold, which was probably put in writing in the thirteenth century,
although the events are supposed to have transpired in the eighth
century. But Tegnér has freely drawn material from other Old Norse sagas
and songs, and this, and not a little of his own personal experience, he
has woven into the story with the consummate skill of a master. He made
full use of his poetic license and eliminated and added, reconstructed
and embellished just as was convenient for his plan. "My object", he
says, "was to represent a poetical image of the old Northern hero age. It
was not Fritiof as an individual whom I would paint; it was the epoch of
which he was chosen as the representative." [Tegnér, Samlade Skrifter,
II, 393.]

It was Tegnér's firm conviction that the poet writes primarily for the
age in which he himself lives, and since he wrote for a civilized
audience he must divest Fritiof of his raw and barbarous attributes,
though still retaining a type of true Northern manhood. On this point
Tegnér says: "It was important not to sacrifice the national, the lively,
the vigorous and the natural. There could, and ought to, blow through the
song that cold winter air, that fresh Northern wind which characterizes
so much both the climate and the temperament of the North. But neither
should the storm howl till the very quicksilver froze and all the more
tender emotions of the breast were extinguished."

"It is properly in the bearing of Fritiof's character that I have sought
the solution of this problem. The noble, the high-minded, the bold--which
is the great feature of all heroism--ought not of course to be missing
there, and sufficient material abounded both in this and many other
sagas. But together with this more general heroism, I have endeavored to
invest the character of Fritiof with something individually Northern--
that fresh-living, insolent, daring rashness which belongs, or at least
formerly belonged to the national temperament. Ingeborg says of Fritiof
(Canto 7):

  'How glad, how daring, how inspired with hope,
  Against the breast of norn he sets the point
  Of his good sword, commanding:
  "Thou shalt yield!"'

These lines contain the key to Fritiof's character and in fact to the
whole poem." [Tegnér, Samlade Skrifter, II, p. 393. The entire treatise
is found in English translation in Andersen's Viking Tales.]

In what manner Tegnér modernizes his story by divesting the original saga
of its grotesque and repugnant features can most readily be illustrated
in a comparison between his account of Fritiof's encounter with king
Helge in Balder's temple (Canto 13) and the original story. The latter
tells how Fritiof unceremoniously enters the temple, having first given
orders that all the king's ships should be broken to pieces, and threw
the tribute purse so violently at the king's nose that two teeth were
broken out of his mouth and he fell into a swoon in his high seat. But as
Fritiof was passing out of the temple, he saw the ring on the hand of
Helge's wife, who was warming an image of Balder by the fire. He seized
the ring on her hand, but it stuck fast and so he dragged her along the
floor toward the door and then the image fell into the fire. The wife of
Halfdan tried to come to her assistance, only to let the image she was
warming by the fire fall into the flames. As the image had previously
been anointed, the flames shot up at once and soon the whole house was
wrapped in fire. Fritiof, however, got the ring before he went away. But
as he walked out of the temple, said the people, he flung a firebrand at
the roof, so that all the house was wrapped in flames. Of the violent
feeling that, according to Tegnér, racked Fritiof's soul as he went into
exile or of the deep sense of guilt that latter hung as a pall over his
life there is no mention in the original. Here we touch upon the most
thoroughgoing change that Tegnér made in the character of his hero. He
invested him with a sentimentality, a disposition towards melancholy, an
accusing voice of conscience that torments his soul until full atonement
has been won, that are modern and Christian in essence and entirely
foreign to the pagan story. On this point Tegnér: "Another peculiarity
common to the people of the North is a certain disposition for melancholy
and heaviness of spirit common to all deeper characters. Like some
elegiac key-note, its sound pervades all our old national melodies, and
generally whatever is expressive in our annals, for it is found in the
depths of the nation's heart. I have somewhere or other said of Bellman,
the most national of our poets:

  'And work the touch of gloom his brow o'shading,
  A Northern minstrel-look, a grief in rosy red!'

For this melancholy, so far from opposing the fresh liveliness and
cheering vigor common to the nation, only gives them yet more strength
and elasticity. There is a certain kind of life-enjoying gladness (and of
this, public opinion has accused the French) which finally reposes on
frivolity; that of the North is built on seriousness. And therefore I
have also endeavored to develop in Fritiof somewhat of this meditative
gloom. His repentant regret at the unwilling temple fire, his scrupulous
fear of Balder (Canto 15) who--

  'Sits in the sky, cloudy thoughts sending down,
  Ever veiling my spirit in gloom',

and his longing for the final reconciliation and for calm within
him, are proofs not only of a religious craving, but also and still more
of a national tendency to sorrowfulness common to every serious mind, at
least in the North of Europe." [Tegnér, Samlade Skrifter, II, p. 394.]

Tegnér thus found it easy to justify the sentimentality that
characterizes Fritiof's love for Ingeborg, an element in Fritiofs Saga
that has been most severely condemned by the critics. To the criticism
that this love is too modern and Platonic, Tegnér correctly answers that
reverence for the sex was from the earliest times a characteristic of the
German people so that the light and coarse view that prevailed among the
most cultivated nations of antiquity was a thing quite foreign to the
habits of the North.

Ingeborg like Fritiof is idealized by the poet although here the
departure from the original is not as wide. That delicacy of sentiment
which is inseparable from Ingeborg and guides her right in the great
crisis is not, he maintains, a trait merely of the woman of ancient
Scandinavia but is inherent in each noble female, no matter when or where
she lives. And Tegnér, who surely was no realist after the fashion of
Strindberg, chooses to picture woman as she appears in her loveliest
forms.

The brooding and melancholy spirit that Tegnér had infused into the soul
of Fritiof had in a large measure come from his own life. The depression
of mind that had cast its shadows over him in the years that saw the
creation of Fritiofs Saga grew steadily worse. The period that followed
immediately upon the completion of this work was filled with doubt and
despair. The explanation for this must be found partly in the insidious
progress of a physical disease, partly to a change of place and
environment. Certain hereditary tendencies, which caused him to fear that
the light of reason would desert him, also played a part in this.

In 1824 he gave up the Greek professorship at Lund to become bishop of
the diocese of Växiö in the province of Småland, but the duties of the
new position were not congenial to him. The spiritual and intellectual
life of the diocese was on a low plane and Tegnér threw himself with
tremendous earnestness into the work of reform, but the prejudice and
inertia of clergy and people stood constantly in the way. In his efforts
to purge the church of some unworthy ecclesiastics he encountered bitter
opposition and suffered some humiliations. He took a special interest in
the schools of his diocese and his many pedagogical addresses are models
in point of clearness and practical good sense.

The many and varied duties imposed on him by the episcopal office,
particularly official inspection trips, attendance upon the sessions of
the Riksdag, and serving on numerous important committees made it
impossible for Tegnér to continue his literary activities in the manner
of his university days, but occasionally he would give to his countrymen
a literary masterpiece that showed that the brilliant mind had not been
dimmed.

His mental and physical ailments grew steadily worse and after 1840 there
came periods of insanity which expressed itself in the most chimerical
plans for travel, literary activities, and great national enterprises.
Light came to his reason again, but his strength had been permanently
broken. He died on November 2, 1846, and his body was laid to rest in the
cemetery at Växiö, where a simple monument of marble and Swedish granite
marks his final resting place.


See the content in pg8518.txt 


NOTES.


[The commentaries of F. W. Lindvall's school edition of Fritiofs Saga
have been extensively reproduced.]


CANTO I.

Stanza 1. _Hilding_ was a yeoman or bonde (see note, canto 2: 1) of Sogn
in Norway and fosterfather of Fritiof and Ingeborg. In viking times the
children of kings and great warriors were often entrusted to the care of
less influential and less wealthy friends to be trained by them, thus
removing the young from the temptations and disturbing influences of
court life and warfare. This practice would also remove them from the
danger of being pampered by fond parents or sycophantic servants.

1. _Ej Norden förr sett två så sköna_. The auxiliary _har_ is omitted.
Such omissions are common in subordinate clauses and in poetry.

6. _Såg_. Subjunctive past, regular form _såge_.

6. _i Frejas Hus_. Freja, or Fröja, wife of Öder, was the goddess of
beauty and love. In her abode, Folkvang, were gathered all the lovers who
had been faithful to each other unto death.

7. _älvkungen_. _Älvor_ or _alfer_ were ethereal beings of great beauty
and with voices that had the clearness of silver. During moonlight nights
especially they danced in dales and groves. _Ljusalfer_, light elves,
personified the benign influences in nature, especially as they manifest
themselves in the realms of light and air. _Svartalfer_, black elves,
lived in the earth and personified the silent forces that operate beneath
its surface. They are perhaps identical with the dwarfs. The elves are
here thought of as having kings and queens just as human beings.

8. _En Kung var ej som han i ära_. A king was not honored as he.

8. _runan_. The runes were the characters of the early alphabet of the
Germans, Anglo-Saxons, and Scandinavians. Runic inscriptions were
generally cut into wood, bone or rock.

9. _fick han Ingborg lära. Fick_ may mean either that he was permitted to
teach Ingeborg or that he must do it because of an irresistible desire to
do so.

10. _båd', både_.

12. _Det första ax, vars guld blev moget_. A striking metaphor meaning
"the first head of grain that ripened and assumed a golden color."

13. _innan kort_, before long.

14. _drog på jakt_. Idiomatic expression for "went hunting."

17. _Valhall(a)_, the home of the gods and the palace of Oden. Hither one
half of the heroes that fell in battle were carried by the valkyrs. Here
they spent their time in feasting and fighting.

18. _ett kornland, som för vinden går_. A field of grain that waves
before the wind.

19. _Idun(a)_, wife of Brage and keeper of the golden apples of youth.

20. _Frigg(a)_, the wife of Oden and queen of the goddesses. She was the
goddess of conjugal and motherly love.

21. _Gerd(a)_, wife of Frej, was the daughter of a giant, but
nevertheless renowned for her wonderful beauty.

22. _Nanna_, wife of Balder, personified pure and tender love. Balder was
the fair god who loved light and lived a life of purity and innocence.
The evil Loke induced Balder's blind brother, Öder, to throw an arrow of
mistletoe at him and he fell dead. When Nanna saw the body of her dead
husband carried out to the funeral pyre, her heart burst with grief.

23. _Hel(a)_, goddess of death and ruler of nine worlds in Nifelhem. She
received all that died of sickness or old age, but it seems that others
also came to her abode. In the deepest abyss of her kingdom was a place
of punishment for the wicked. From her name comes the word "hell" and
Swedish _ihjäl (att slå ihjäl_, to kill).

32. _Oden_, oldest and highest god of the Northern races. His spirit
pervaded everything. He is the source of the higher forms of life.

33. _Allfader_, Oden. He is so called because he was supposed to be the
father of men and of gods.

33. _till smycke_, as an ornament. This use of _till_ is very common in
Swedish.

34. _Beles dotter_. Ingeborg's father was Bele, king of Sogn in western
Norway.

35. _Till Oden ... uppstiger hennes ättartal_. The royal families were
supposed to have descended from the gods
(see note, canto XXIV: 237).

36. _Torstens son_. Fritiof was the son of Torsten Vikingsson, a viking
chief.

37. Observe the numerous expressions of the defiant spirit of Fritiof
prior to his going into exile. Note also in stanzas 37 and 38 his
ingenuity in proving his own high rank.

38. _Tor_, god of thunder and of war, the strongest of the gods. All
noble human strength came from him. He was the friend of man and the
enemy of the giants with whom he had many hard conflicts. His abode,
Trudvang, was marvelously beautiful. When he journeyed forth from
Trudvang, driving a span of he-goats, to meet the giants, thunder and
lightning arose.


CANTO II.

Stanza 1. _bonde_. This term is generally translated by the word peasant.
The word yeoman is often used as an equivalent term and sometimes the
original Scandinavian form _bonde_ is used in English. A _bonde_ was an
independent land-holder, liberty-loving, and, as a rule, an active
participant in public affairs.

3. _mjöd_, mead, a fermented drink made of water, honey and hops with a
flavoring of spices.

5. _altarrunden_. The pagan temples had no altars. The figure is borrowed
from the modern temple.

5. _offerlunden_. The Norse temples were usually surrounded by sacred
groves.

8. _hon_; antecedent is endräkt.

8. _som ringen på lansen_. This refers to the metal ring that served to
hold the point of the lance to the lance itself and thus gave it greater
strength.

11. _På pelarstoder fyra_. According to Scandinavian mythology the
heavens were supported by four dwarfs, _Austre_, East, _Västre_, West,
_Nordre_, North, and _Södre_, South.

13. _Nog svika lungans tecken i offrad falk_. This assumes that the
Norsemen read signs by observing the entrails of animals. Authorities
differ on this point. Some maintain that the poet has here merely
borrowed from classical mythology.

13. _flärd är mången runa, som skärs på balk_. Meaningless or deceptive
is many a rune that is cut in the staff. The early Northmen believed that
the will of the gods could be ascertained by writing runes on sticks of
wood which then were thrown on the ground and read by the priests.

18. _hur vis han het_ (heter). Expression is equivalent to "Hur vis han
än må heta."

18. _högbänk_. In the primitive Scandinavian homes benches were placed
along the four walls. The men had their places along the long walls
(långsidor) and the women along the end walls (kortsidor). At the center
of the two long walls were high seats of honor. The master of the house
occupied the one on the north side and the chief guest the one on the
south side.

21. _till Oden gå_, to die.

22. _Odens fåglar_. Oden is represented as having two birds, Hugin
(thought) and Munin (memory or, according to some authorities, the
longing that impels Oden to activity), which are dispatched to the earth
at every day-break and in the evening return to Oden and whisper into his
ears the news of the day's happenings.

26. _ty vädret rår för årsväxt och vind för lycka_. Equivalent to saying
that man is not himself the absolute master of his own destiny. The
forces of nature can thwart all his plans.

28. Throughout this canto Tegnér draws freely from Havamal, the "Song of
Oden" or the "Song of the Most High," which is replete with precepts on
morality and wisdom. In this stanza this ancient Scandinavian song is
followed very closely. Note the frequent sarcastic references to woman in
the Saga.

32. _norna_. The norns, three in number, weave the fate of men and gods.
Urda was the norn of the past, Verdandi of the present, and Skulda of the
future.

32. _hon stötte på sköld_. The meaning is: Wherever fate threatened with
some danger it was met by courage and vigilance.

33. _de asasöner_. See note, canto I: 35.

33. _Nordlands kungar_, the kings of the Northland.

38. _bautasten_. A monument erected in honor of rulers or heroes.

39. _Frej_, the god of sunshine and warm summer showers, hence also the
god of harvests.


CANTO III.

Line 1. _Voro nu satta i hög_. Were interred.

2. _fjärden_. In this case Sognefjord.

6. _fäste i lugn sin boning på Framnäs_. Took up his abode on Framnäs.
This probably lay on the south side of Sognefjord.

9. _de kullarnas topp. De_ is seldom used in this way. Here supplied for
the sake of the meter.

15. _som längta till stävan_. That yearn to be milked.

23. _till tio tolfter på hundrat_. A so-called _storhundrade_ or great
hundred was 120.

26. _högsätespelare_, the posts of the seat of honor. On it were carved
images of Oden and Frej.

28. _Frej med solen på hatten_. Frej was the sun god and was pictured
with a sun on his helmet.

34. _Östervåg_, Eastern billow, the Baltic. _Västersaltet_, Western salt,
the North Sea, _Gandvik_, the White Sea.

36. _Brage_, the god of poetry and music.

38. _Mimers evigt sorlande våg_. Mimer's ever rippling fountain. The god
Mimer guarded the fountain of wisdom. Oden once pawned one of his eyes
for a drink out of this fountain.

52. _visthus_. These were small houses, separated from the main building,
in which food was kept.

58. _Österland_, Asia.

59. _dvärgarnas eld_. The dwarfs were supposed to be most skillful
smiths.

61. _Gröningasund_, a sound between Seeland, Moen and Falster in Denmark.

62. _het_, abbrev. for _hette_.

63. _Ulleråker_, a royal estate near Uppsala, where judicial assemblies
were held.

68. _Järnhös_. The word means iron skull.

76. _vid solens portar_, in Asia.

79. _Hildur_, the goddess of war. "Hildur's lek" means war.

84. _Vaulund_ was the most skillful smith among the dwarfs. He is called
_haltande_, lame or limping, because Mimer's wife, who was his bitter
enemy, had cut the tendons of his knees.

85. _Tre mark höll han i vikt_. It weighed three marks. A mark was
approximately one half kilogram.

88. _Alfhem_, the realm of air between heaven and earth, was the home of
the elves and of Frej.

90. _Saga_, wife of Oden and goddess of history. She dwelt in Sökvabäck
beneath the stream of time and events, taking note of all she saw. Here
Oden visited her daily to drink the pure water from golden beakers and
listen to her songs about former days.

99. After the death of Balder (see note, canto I: 22) his body was burned
on a great funeral pyre.

100. _Glitner_, "glittering hall," the home of Forsete, the god of
justice.

110. _Bretland_, England.

111. _satt sig med skepp_, interred with ship and all.

114. _draken_. The viking ships were so called because in the prow were
placed carved images of the dragon's head and the stern was made to
resemble the dragon's tail.

164. _Ägir_, the god of the stormy sea.

171. _vingarna_. The sails.

172. _blev efter_. Was left behind in the race.

179. _Var han ej konungason_. Even though he was not a king's son.

186. _blandat blod med varandra_. A solemn compact of brotherhood was
sealed by the parties to it causing their blood to flow together from
self-inflicted wounds while they made the promises that are stated in the
text.


CANTO IV.

Stanza 2. _drakarna_. See note, canto III: 114.

3. _till gäst_. See note, canto I: 33.

4. _dess sida_. Dess, genitive of _den_ and _det_, is irregularly used
here. The regular form would be _hennes_.

5. _De taltes vid_. They talked together.

6. _namnen, som grodde i björkens bark_. See canto I: 27.

9. Observe in last line the change to direct address.

10. _väl_, doubtless.

11. _dagen om_, throughout the day.

16. _jagar i molnen_. Goes ahunting in the clouds, is dreaming.

18. _Den strådöd_. For the ancient Northmen it was a great disgrace to
die a natural death. Death from self-inflicted wounds was more honorable.
The use of _den_ without an adjective is archaic.

18. _blåvit Hela_. Hela (see note, canto I: 23) was hideous in
appearance. Half of her body was livid in color and the other half bore
the ghastly pallor of death.

23. _jarl_, chief of a province. English, earl.

26. _Nordlandens drotter_, the kings of the Northland.

27. _Odensblodet_. See note, canto I: 35.

28. _man_. In this connection _man_ means one of the king's retinue. The
_bönder_ rarely sought protection from kings and the proposal of Helge
was highly insulting to Fritiof, who himself had a retinue.

30. _runorna lågade röda därpå_. See canto II: 78-81.

31. _svartekung_, swartbeard. Helge is given this name, partly because of
his swarthy features, partly because he practices black arts. See canto
II: 5.


CANTO V.

Stanza 1. King Ring ruled over Ringerike, on the west side of Kristiania
fjord.

4. _snäckorna_, ships.

4. _vita vingar_, white wings, sails.

4. _av rikdom, som rikdomen (be)tingar_. Of wealth that brings more
wealth, or upon which further wealth is contingent.

11. _jag gått i frö_, I have grown old.

11. _kungens de glesnade lockar. De_ is here used irregularly.

17. _Men lungorna nekade bifall alltjämt_. Constantly the signs refused
to he affirmative. For reading of signs see note, canto II: 13.

2l. _i templet sätter jag min syster_. The temple of Balder is referred
to. Here persons were inviolate and it was especially a great crime for a
man to visit a woman in this sacred place.


CANTO VI.

Observe the ingenuity with which Fritiof's words to Björn are also made
to convey an answer to Hilding. _Kung_ and _bonde_ refer to Helge and
Fritiof, but they are also the chess terms for king and pawn. Note also
the ingenious rhyme of this canto.

Stanza 6. _sköldborg_. In battle the chief warriors stood around the king
and the royal banner in closed ranks with their shields turned outward
for protection.

11. _man_. See note, canto IV: 28.

Stanza 3. _Delling_, Dawn, was the husband of _Natt_. Their son, _Dag_,
was radiant with heauty.

4. _pärlor_, the stars.

5. _kärlekens gudinna_. Fritiof's name for Ingeborg.

10. _valkyria_. The valkyrs were beautiful maidens that served in
Valhall. They were sent by Oden to the battlefields to select certain
among the fallen heroes and bring them to Valhall.

16. _Vingolv_, the common hall of the gods.

19--22. Compare Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet, Act III., Scene V.

20. _Ragnarök_, the twilight of the gods, the end of the world.


CANTO VIII.

Lines 27--28. See note, canto V: 21.

35. _Urdas blanka våg_. The pure water of Urda's fountain. The norns
daily brought holy water out of this fountain to sprinkle the roots of
the great world-tree Yggdrasil in order to keep it ever green. This tree
is symbolic of the universe as a great unity. Its branches reach unto
heaven. One of its roots extends unto the abode of men, another to the
realm of the giants and the third to Hel's kingdom.

36. _Gefton_, the virgin goddess and the protector of female chastity.
All women that died unmarried were supposed to serve her.

57. _Bifrosts bro_, the rainbow, the radiant bridge over which the gods
pass from heaven to earth. The valkyrs conduct the fallen heroes to
Valhall over this bridge.

59. _Där skall han stå_. Han refers to the god of love who is represented
as having light wings on his shoulders.

65--66. See canto I: 35.

77. _Min vreda norna_. My evil fate.

87. The _ting_ or judicial assembly was held in the open, usually by a
burial mound or on a knoll. The proximity to the burial place added
solemnity to the procedure. The dead were supposed to be able to hear the
deliberations (see canto 4: 25). The judge's seat usually consisted of a
boulder.

91--95. See canto II: 5 and 6.

105. _Asa-Tor_, a common designation for Tor.

106. _till försoning_, in reconciliation.

109-110. _som glad drack fria männers bifall till det rätta_. Observe the
apt and striking metaphor.

124. _Ett bleklagt nej på mänsklighetens böner_. A striking hyperbole.
Only Fritiof and Ingeborg and the assembly were directly concerned.

129. _Har du ej sett. Sett_ here used instead of _träffat_ or _mött_.

145. _Den dumma vantron_. Note Fritiof's frequent sarcastic references to
the religious beliefs and practices of his day. In later cantos (15-24)
he appears as a serious-minded and "orthodox" man.

149. _den döda valans_. Refers to Oden's journey to Hel to ascertain from
the vala what fate awaited his son Balder. She predicts the death of
Balder at the hands of his brother. (See note, canto I: 22.)

150. _Vegtamskvida_, the Eddic Lay of Vegtam. This tells about Odin's
journey to Hel. He traveled in disguise and under the name of Vegtam.

156. _i Västerhafvet_, in the North Sea. The islands referred to are the
Orkneys, which were first visited by the Northmen in the early part of
the seventh century.

164. _Fafner_, a monster that had acquired great wealth by murdering his
father. In the form of a hideous dragon he guarded this treasure
carefully. His chief means of defense was spewing poison upon those that
attacked him.

165. _Sigurd Fafnesbane_, Sigurd the Dragonkiller. He slays Fafner by
thrusting his sword into the heart of the monster. He is the foremost
hero of the old sagas.

168. _till nästa sommar_. By next summer.

177. _Nastrand_, the dark region of the nether world whither all went
that had lived criminal and impure lives.

216. _Greklands hav_, the Grecian Sea. The Northern vikings often
extended their expeditions to Southern Europe and even to Asia.

233. _fägna än med mänsklig lycka de förgätna gudar_. This betrays
Fritiof's ignorance of the Greek's conception of their gods. The Greeks
believed that the gods became jealous of men when these prospered and
were happy.

272. _I högen din fader sitter_. The bodies of fallen heroes were placed
in a sitting posture in the funeral mound.

275. _är mig i faders ställe. Mig_, possessive dative.

285. _nu_, once for all.

303. _diktade i molnen_, fancied and located in the clouds.

360. _kung Helges syster_. There is bitterness in Fritiof's parting
words. Observe that later when Ingeborg's sound reasoning has convinced
and calmed him he calls her _kung Beles dotter_.

380. _Alltsen mitt väsen började att dagas_. Ever since the dawn of my
existence.

441. _man diktat på mig_, falsely attributed to me; _måna'r_, månader.

466. _ger sitt liv till spillo_. Sacrifices his life. _Till spillo_ is an
antiquated dative.


CANTO IX.

Stanza 2. _det är lyckligt, får följa_. Either _som_ or _det_ supplied
before _får_.

4. _Ej till hans möte: ej att möta honom_. Not to meet him. This
objective genitive occurs very seldom.

5. A fine example of the terse and striking expressions that are so
numerous in Tegnér.

6. _Falk_. The custom of using the falcon in the hunt is very old in
Scandinavia.

8. _Öder_, the faithless and restless husband of Freja. Once when he left
her and remained away a long time she sought him in all lands. The tears
she wept while on this sad errand were so precious that they turned to
gold; hence this metal is found in all lands. According to one version of
the story, she finally found Öder in the South, sitting under the myrtle
tree; hence the custom that every bride in Scandinavia must wear a crown
of myrtle.


CANTO X.

Stanza 1. _tänk på_, think of.

2. _Sam_ and _Hejd_ were two monsters that Helge had sent for and offered
presents with the request that they raise a storm that would destroy
Fritiof and his men. They appeared in the guise of polar bear and eagle.

2. _gudars hem_, the heavens.

3. _Solundar-ö_, an island near the Norwegian coast, probably at the
outlet of Sognefjord. Today the group is called the Outer and the Inner
Sol Islands.

4. _gudatimrade_, built by the gods. See note, canto 3: 164 seq.

5. _kan du icke se för natt_, could not see because of the darkness.

5. _dra seglaren i kvav_. Drag the sailor into the deep. _Gå i kvav_, to
founder, go down.

5. _Ran(a)_, wife of Ägir and goddess of the sea, was hostile to men and
sought to drag them down into the deep. She was passionately fond of
gold, and sailors deemed it wise to have some of the yellow metal with
them with which to appease her in case they foundered at sea. (See stanza
6.)

5. _åt oss_, for us.

6. _fästa havsbrud_, plight troth with the goddess of the sea.

7. _kvad den_, called it forth by incantation.

8. _skepna'n_, skepnaden.

8. _är du gudars dotter_. See canto III: 164 seq.

9. _hålla sjön_, keep afloat.

10. _Efjesund_, a sound in the Orkney Islands. Angantyr was jarl of the
Orkneys.

11. _havets mör_, the waves, nine beautiful daughters of Ägir and Ran who
delighted in playing all over the surface of their father's vast domain.

11. _mjödhorn vandrande på guldfot_. The drinking horns of the ancients
often had metal supports.


CANTO XI.

Stanza 1. _såg ut åt blånad ban_, looked out over the blue course (sea).

1. _allt som_, just like.

2. _blott hornet in han stack_, he passed the horn back through the
window to have it refilled.

4. _På gången och på pannan_. The definite form may be used thus instead
of the possessive when there is no ambiguity.

5. _bärsärk_, from _ber_, bare, and _serk_, shirt or coat of mail. The
berserk was an unarmed warrior that went to battle in a frenzy and
possessed with preternatural strength. In their fury the berserks would
attack indiscriminately friend or foe or even inanimate objects. They
were looked upon as abnormal.

8. _var runa stod i brand_. See canto III: 74-81.

10. _pröva annan färd_, try a new way.

13. _till slut_, at last.

13. _livet ... på dig_. A characteristic prepositional possessive.

14. _jag ligger som jag låg_, I will remain still.

15. _höll mitt i hugget inne_, stopped in the very act of striking.

16 _törsten gör mig men_, the thirst hurts me.

17-18. The description of Angantyr's hall is very much modernized by the
poet.

20. _som en ros i runa_. May perhaps mean an embellished rune or a flower
enclosed in a letter.

22. _ej sitte fjärran från_, should not sit far away.

23. _Sikelö_, Sicily.

24. _Morven_. Northern Scotland, which was often visited by vikings.

24. _välska_, Gaelic, the language spoken in the Scotch Highlands.

24. _norräna tunga_, Norse tongue, the common language of Scandinavia
before and during the Viking period.

29. _männer_, archaic plural.

30. _Astrild_, Cupid.

32. _fjärran myntat guld_, gold coined far away, foreign money.

34. _satt ... vintern ut_, remained to the end of winter.


CANTO XII.

Line 9. _Ägirs döttrar_, the waves. See canto X: 11.

19. _dar_, dagar.

21. _växer ut_, assumes the form.

84. _Eriksgata_, from _edh-vreks-gata (ed-givar-gata)_, the journey of
early kings to receive the homage of their subjects. Some authorities see
the origin of the word in the fact that Erik the Saint was supposed to be
the first king to take one of these royal trips.

91. _Disardalen_, the valley of the gods where Balder's temple lay.

108. _Loke_, the evil giant-god, the enemy of all that was good.

129. _Var_, the goddess of plighted troth. She recorded the solemn
promises of lovers and the marriage vows and avenged any violation of the
same.

135. _Balders Nanna_. See canto I: 22.

145. _sår högens säd_, sows the seed of the funeral mound, i. e., takes
life.

164. _Vidar_, the silent god, who next to Tor was the strongest among the
asar. He avenges Oden in Ragnarök.

187. _den dagen ... från min runstav tagen_. The early Scandinavians had
some sort of calendars, consisting of runes carved on a staff.

198. _Lofn_, the mild and good goddess, and the deity of matrimony.

199. _vite guden_, Balder.

200. _så när som_, except.


CANTO XIII.

Stanza 2. _då rår Höder för världen_, then Höder (Öder) rules the world.
Höder, the blind brother of Balder, is the god of night and darkness.

7. _Västervågor_, the western sea.

12. _din like_, one like you.

17. _Fritiof blygs, att han darrar_, Fritiof is so ashamed that he
trembles. The antecedent of _han_ may be Björn and not Fritiof, the
meaning then being, that the latter is ashamed because Björn trembles.

20. _flödar_, pours water.

22. _eldröd hane_. The red cock, the symbol of fire.

25. _Muspels söner_, the flames. Muspel or Muspelhem, the fire world, lay
south of the abyss Ginnungagap and was guarded by the flame giant Surt.


CANTO XIV.

In the first part of this canto Fritiof gives free expression to his
skepticism and to his contempt for the superstition of his day. See canto
VIII, lines 145, 196, 197, 255; canto XIII, stanzas 3, 13. Such
skepticism was common in Scandinavia just before the introduction of
Christianity.

91. _döna_, for _dåna_.

123. _gudabloden_. Blod is neuter but here used as a gender noun.

175. _nidingsstänger_ were pillars raised at crossroads or other
conspicuous places to mock an enemy or to indicate that he was held in
contempt by every one. At the top was the head of a horse and further
down were comic inscriptions giving the name of the despised person and
the nature of his offence.

179. _till lands_, on land, antiquated genitive. There are many similar
expressions in Swedish.

190. _Gudbrands däld_, the valley of Gudbrand in central Norway.

196. _springa_, break.

202. _Heimskringla_, the earth. Note the apt figure _Heimskringlas
panna_, meaning the Northland.

233. _snögar_, poetical form for _snöar_.


CANTO XV.

Stanza 3. _Kort är hammarens skaft hos den segrande Tor_. The handle of
Tor's hammer, Mjölner, was very short; in his conflicts with the giants
the god hurled it at the enemies. It always returned to his hand, no
matter how far he might hurl it. Frej's sword, referred to, had the power
of fighting successfully of its own accord as soon as it was drawn from
the sheath.

4. _den som stryker (segel)_, the one that lowers the sails, i.e.,
surrenders.

6. _Valfader_, Oden.

9. _nu_, equivalent to _om_.

15. _vill du hälsas för vår_, if you would be hailed as one of us.

15. _Ljungaren_, the thunderer, Tor.


CANTO XVI.

Stanza 4. _holmgång_, a duel, so called because originally fought on a
small island _(holme)_.

8. _Hagbart_, a Norse sea king, was secretly betrothed to Signe, daughter
of Sigar, king of Seeland, who caused Hagbart to be captured and hanged.
Signe then put fire to her chamber and perished in the flames. The tragic
story formed a popular theme for Scandinavian bards.

8. _rista blodörn_, inscribe the blood eagle. This was a monstrous
practice by which the Northmen sometimes wreaked vengeance upon their
fallen enemies. The ribs were severed from the spinal column and bent
outward in the form of wings and salt poured into the wounds, whereupon
the entrails were torn out.


CANTO XVII.

Stanza 6. _helt mycket_, a great deal.

6. _I Ånger är jag uppfödd_, seq. Fritiof's dejection blinds his eyes to
the happy conditions of his boyhood and youth. What he says is not true.
Compare with cantos I and III.

7. _bränner salt vid strand_, boils the sea water to get a residue of
salt. This occupation was carried on by the poor and the aged and was
considered a very menial service.

14. _nu var löftets timme, och in bärs Frejers galt_. The yule time
marked the return of light and was therefore an occasion for great
rejoicing and sacrificing to Frej, the sun god. In his honor a roasted
boar was placed on the table and with their hands on its head the
warriors vowed that they would perform certain heroic deeds.

15. _vinna_, conquer.

18. _i vinter_, this winter.

24. _helt skarpt_, quite liberally, profusely.

24. _ett ärligt julerus_, a good yuletide spree.


CANTO XVIII.

Stanza 6. _Sleipner_, the eight-footed steed of Odin, which was swifter
than the wind and never grew tired.


CANTO XIX.

Stansa 2. _med kappor över öga_. The falcons were trained for the hunt by
starving them and keeping a hood over their eyes. This was removed just
before the bird was released. It then rose perpendicularly and started in
pursuit of its prey.

3. _Rota_, a valkyr.

5. _Odens sal_, heaven.

5. _valkyrjan_, the huntress.

7. _Grubblar viking_. This has a conditional meaning; _om_ implied before
the clause.

9. _Ty de hata mänskors ätter_. Fritiof had changed his ideas about the
gods. See canto VIII: 235.

13-15. The birds give expression to Fritiof's own thoughts.

16. _I, som aldrig skulle_. The easier conversational form _skulle_ is
here used, rather than _skullen_, which the strict adherence to
grammatical forms would require.

17. _Nifelhem_, the abode of mist and darkness.

25. _varg i veum_, wolf in the temple, i. e., profaner of the sanctuary.


CANTO XX.

Stanza 1. _Skinfaxe_, the shining steed of _Dag_, day.

3. _vingade hästen_, the ship.

10. _rista geirs-odd_, to take one's own life by wounding oneself with a
lance.

13. _blodiga drotter_, bloody deeds of achievement.

13. _ätthögens dotter_, the peace that awaits him in another world.

14. _gjallarhorn_, the trumpet of Heimdall, the sentry of the gods.
_Gjallarhornet_ can be heard to the remotest part of the world. Upon it
Heimdall would blow one terrific blast to summon the gods to the final
conflict in Ragnarök.


CANTO XXI.

Stanza 4. _Vanadis_. Freja, having been born in Vanaheim, was also known
as Vanadis.

5. _bärsärk_. See canto XI: 5.

9. _dvärgarnas dag-glans, drakarnas bädd_, gold. The dwarfs and dragons
had a passionate desire for gold. _Dvärgarnas dag-glans_ is an allusion
to the belief that the subterranean caves of the dwarfs were illuminated
by gold. _Drakarnas bädd_ alludes to the supposition that all great
treasures in caves were guarded by fierce dragons, as Fafner. See canto
VIII: 164.


CANTO XXII.

Stanza 1. _Budkavlen_. Men were summoned to assemblies by staffs that
were inscribed with runes and passed from house to house.

7. _på öppet ting_. See canto VIII: 87.

11. _Odens ätt_. See canto I: 35.

16. _böndren_, regular form, _bönderna_.

20. _sköldemör_, shield maidens. The valkyrs were sometimes called norns.

20. _De bygga under tidens träd och ovanför_. This refers to the norns
who dwelt at the well of Urd by the world-tree Yggdrasil. But they also
determine the fate of men on earth. _Bygga_ means here build and dwell.


CANTO XXIII.

Stanza 2. _o, den som, aldrig gungat däruppå_! Note how Fritiof has
changed his mind regarding life on the sea. Contrast this with canto XII:
143 seq.; XIV: 65 seq.; XIX: 27 seq.

5. _Nidhögg_, a dragon that was continually gnawing at the roots of
Yggdrasil in order to bring about the destruction of the gods.

5. _mörkrets värld_, Nifelhem.

7. _fromme gud_, Balder.

9. _Angantyr_, a great warrior, who fell in a duel and was buried
together with his famous sword, Tyrfing. His daughter Hervor appealed to
him to give her the sword. This he did, at the same time predicting that
it would some day bring disaster upon her and upon her people.

13. _Breidablick_, Balder's glittering palace, the most beautiful hall in
Valhall. Its purity was such that nothing common or unclean could endure
within its confines.

14. _bäst som_, just as.

15. _mör från tidens källa_. See canto XXII: 20.


CANTO XXIII.

Line 16. _I voren tempelbrand för mig en gång_. Equivalent to saying:
When I saw you I was reminded of the burning temple.


CANTO XXIV.

Line 5. _hillebarder_, halberds, weapons that were a combination of axe
and spear.

9. _templet i Uppsala likt_. The ancient pagan temple at Uppsala was
famous for its marvelous beauty.

23. _Vala_. The reference is to Voluspa, the Vala Prophecy, one of the
oldest if not the oldest poetic production of Scandinavia.

26. _fromhetsguden_, Balder.

37-39. See canto I: 22.

56. _Valaskjalf_, a beautiful palace of Oden which was built by the gods
and roofed with pure silver. In this palace is the throne Hlidskjalf.
Seated there, Oden could overlook the whole world.

76. _Jotunheim_ or _Utgård_ was the dark and chaotic realm of the giants,
which lay in the uttermost part of the earth.

77. _gudabälte_. Tors' wonderful belt, Megingjard which doubled his
strength when he put it on. With his mailed gauntlets he seizes his
hammer Mjölner.

78. _Utgårda-Loke_. The evil giant-god is so called because he has his
realm in Utgård. See note, line 76.

81. _Ägirs barm_, the ocean.

88. _Ymer_, an enormous giant which the gods slew and from whose body
they formed earth and heaven. His flesh constitutes the earth; the bones,
mountains; the teeth, rocks; the skull, the heavenly vault; and the
blood, oceans.

96. _Asker_, the first created man.

103. _fågeln kommer flygande_. See canto II: 22.

106. _när Balder föll_. See canto I: 22.

110. _Midgårdsormen_, the serpent of Midgård, which Oden threw into the
sea where it grew until it encircled the earth.

111. _Fenris_ or _Fenrisulven_, a giant wolf, son of Loke, which the gods
bound securely to a solid rock. There he lies howling until the end of
mundane things, when he breaks his fetters and devours Oden. Oden's son,
Vidar, avenges his death by slaying Fenris.

112. _Surt or Surtur_, the god of fire, who guards the fiery realm
Muspelhem. At Ragnarök he is the first to ride forth to conflict with the
gods. He carries a flaming sword that transcends the sun in brightness.

114-116. _I Valhall gal gullkammig hane_, seq. The cock, as the symbol of
fire, announces the coming of Ragnarök. A golden-combed cock awakens the
halls of Valhall, a red cock crows on earth and beneath the earth.

161. _Vigrids hundramilaslätt_. Vigrid's plains, one hundred miles
square, upon which is waged the final conflict between the gods and the
forces of evil.

175. _Idavallen_, the plains of Ida, where the gods first met after the
creation of heaven and earth. Here the gods were at play when Balder
fell. After Ragnarök the regenerated gods return to Idavallen and recall
to their mind the heroic deeds they had performed. In the grass they find
the wonderful golden disks that had been the property of the ancient
gods.

181. _Gimles port_, the portal of Gimle, a hall lined with gold and
fairer than the sun, in which the righteous dwell after Ragnarök in
eternal bliss.

193. _leder gångarn fram_. The horse was used for food and for sacrifice.

211. _jungfruns son_, Christ. Returning warriors and tradesmen and
captives of war had undoubtedly at the time of Fritiof brought to
Scandinavia some knowledge of the teachings of the Christian religion.
The Balder of Scandinavian mythology has many of the attributes of
Christ.

237. _Semings blod_. Seming was one of the sons of Oden that became the
progenitor of a family of kings. Ingeborg and her brothers had descended
from him.

258. _Jumala_, a Finnish deity.

292. _varg i veum_. See canto XIX: 25.




INDEX TO MYTHOLOGICAL TERMS.


[Figures refer to canto and line or stanza under which explanatory notes
are given.]

/*[4]
    Alfhem, 3: 88.
    Allfader, 1: 33.
    Asa-Tor, 8: 105.
    Asker, 24: 96.
    Astrild, 11: 30.
    Austre, 2: 11.
    Balder, 1: 22; 3: 99.
    Bifrost, 8: 57.
    Brage, 3: 36.
    Breidablick, 23: 13.
    Dag, 7: 3.
    Delling, 7: 3.
    Disardalen, 12: 91.
    Dvärgar, l: 7; 2: 11; 3: 59; 21: 9.
    Fafner, 8: 164.
    Fenris, 24: 111.
    Folkvang, 1:6.
    Forsete, 3: 100.
    Frigga, 1: 20.
    Frej, 2: 39; 3: 28, 194; 17: 14.
    Freja, 1: 6; 9: 8.
    Geflon, 8: 36.
    Gerda, 1: 21.
    Gimle, 24: 181.
    Gjallarhom, 20: 14.
    Glitner, 3: 100.
    Havamal, 2: 28.
    Hel, 1: 23; 4: 18.
    Heimdal, 20: 4.
    Heimskringla, 14: 207.
    Hildur, 3: 79.
    Hugin, 2: 22.
    Höder (öder), 1: 22; 9: 8; 13: 2.
    Idavallen, 24: 175.
    Iduna, 1: 19.
    Jotunheim, 24: 76.
    Lofn, 12: 198.
    Loke, 1: 22; 12: 108.
    Megingjard, 24: 77.
    Midgårdsormen, 24: 110.
    Mimer, 3: 38.
    Mjölner, 15: 3.
    Munin, 2: 22.
    Muspelhem, 13: 25.
    Nanna, 2: 22.
    Nastrand, 8: 177.
    Natt, 7: 3.
    Nidhögg, 23: 5.
    Nifelhem, 19: 17.
    Nornor, 2: 32; 22: 20.
    Nordre, 2: 11.
    Oden, l: 32; 2: 22; 3: 90.
    Ragnarök, 7: 20.
    Ran, 10: 5.
    Rota, 19: 3.
    Saga, 3: 90.
    Seming, 24: 237.
    Sigurd Fafnesbane, 8: 165.
    Skinfaxe, 20: 1.
    Skulda, 2: 32.
    Sleipner, 18: 6.
    Surt, 24: 112.
    Sökvabäck, 3: 90.
    Södre, 2: 11.
    Tor, 1: 38; 15: 3.
    Trudvang, 1: 38.
    Urda, 2: 32; 7: 35.
    Utgårda-Loke, 24: 78.
    Vala, 24: 23.
    Valaskjalf, 24: 56.
    Valfader, 15: 6.
    Valhall, 1: 17.
    Valkyria, 7: 10.
    Vanadis, 21: 4.
    Var, 12: 129.
    Vaulund, 3: 84.
    Vegtam, 8: 150.
    Verdandi, 2: 32.
    Vidar, 12: 164.
    Vigrid, 24: 161.
    Vingolv, 7: 16.
    Västre, 2: 11.
    Yggdrasil, 7: 35; 22: 20.
    Ymer, 24: 88.
    Ägir, 3: 164; 10: 11.
    Älvor, 1: 7.
    Öder (Höder), 1: 22; 9: 8; 13: 2.
*/



BIBLIOGRAPHY.

/*[4]
    ANDERSON, RASMUS B. Viking Tales of the North, Chicago, 1876.
    BOYESEN, H. H. Essays on Scandinavian Literature, New York, 1895.
    BOLDT, A. Esaias Tegnér, Helsingfors, 1904.
    BRÄNDES, GEORGE. Esaias Tegnér. En litteraturpsychologisk studie,
        Copenhagen, 1878.
    --Mennesker og Værker, Copenhagen, 1883.
    BÖTTIGER, C. W. Levnadsteckning. Esaias Tegnérs Samlade skrifter.
        Nationalupplaga.
    ERDMAN, Nils. Esaias Tegnér. En porträttstudie, Stockholm, 1896.
    FLOM, G. T. Frithiofs Saga, Chicago, 1909.
    HORN, F. W. History of the Literature of the Scandinavian North.
        Translated by R. B. Anderson, Chicago, 1901.
    LJUNGGREN, GUSTAV. Om Tegnérs Fritiofs Saga, Stockholm, 1877. Also
        Svenska Akademiens Handlingar, Series of 1796, LII. and LIII.
    LONGFELLOW, H. W. Tegnér's Frithiofs Saga. The North American Review,
        XLV.
    LYTH, P. G. Tegnér och Frithiofs Saga, Norrköping, 1894.
    MINNE AF ESAIAS TEGNÉR, Stockholm, 1866. Contains biographical data on
        Tegnér by Franzén, Rappe, Geijer, Wieselgren, Hagberg, and
        Adlersparre, together with many poems by Franzén, Wallin, Longfellow,
        Oehlenschläger and others.
    NYBLAEUS, AXEL. Esaias Tegnér, Lund, 1882.
    SCHUCK, HENRIK, OCH WAEBURG, KARL. Illustrerad Svensk Litteraturhistoria,
        III. Stockholm, 1897.
    SHAW, CLEMENT, B. Frithiofs Saga, Chicago, 1908.
    TEGNÉR, ELOF. Ur Tegnérs papper, Stockholm, 1882. Contains a large number
        of letters to Tegnér from contemporary authors and other friends.
        Covers the period of 1801-1844.
    VEDEL, VALDEMAR. Svensk Romantik, Copenhagen, 1894.
*/



VOCABULARY


In the case of nouns, the singular with the postpositive definite article
and the indefinite plural are given in parenthesis. When a dash takes the
place of a plural ending it indicates that the indefinite plural is the
same as the indefinite singular. The vertical lines within a word
indicate to what part the endings are to be added.

The principal parts of irregular and strong verbs are given in full.

/*[4]
    A.

    ack, ah, oh, alas.
    adel, (-n), nobility,
    afton (-en, aftnar), evening.
    aftondagg (-en), evening dew.
    aftonrodnad (-en, -er), sunset glow.
    aftonsol (-en, -ar), evening sun.
    aftonvind (-en, -ar), evening breeze.
    akt, attention, giv --, look out, take notice.
    akt|a (-ade, -at), to consider worthy, respect, notice; -- sig, beware.
    akt|giva (-gav, -givit), to notice, pay attention.
    aktning (-en), respect.
    al (-en, -ar) alder.
    aldrig, never.
    alf (-en, -er), elf.
    all, (allt, alla), all.
    allena, (allen), alone.
    allenast, only.
    Allfader (-n), Father of All, Oden.
    alltför, altogether too.
    alltid, always, forever.
    alltren, already.
    alltjämt, all the time, always.
    alltså, thus.
    alltnog, enough.
    alltsedan, ever since.
    allvar (-et), seriousness.
    allvarsam, serious, grave.
    almträd (-et, --), elm.
    aln (-en, -ar), yard, ell.
    altare (-t, -n), altar.
    altarrund (-en, -er), altar circle.
    amm|a (-ade, -at), to nurse.
    an, on, forward, up.
    an|a (-ade, -at), to apprehend, divine.
    an|bringa (-bragte, -bragt), to attach, put.
    and|as (-ades, -ats), to breathe.
    and|e (-en, -ar), spirit.
    andedrag (-et, --), breath.
    andre, andra, other, second.
    anfall (-et, --), attack.
    ankare (-t, -n), anchor.
    ankartåg (-et, --), anchorchain.
    anklag|a (-ade, -at), to accuse.
    anlete (-t, -n), face, countenance.
    anletsdrag (-et, --), features.
    annan, (ann, annat, def., andre, andra), other, different, else.
    annars, otherwise.
    annorlunda, different.
    anor, no sing., ancestral traits, descent.
    an|slå (-slog, -slagit, -slagen), to strike, touch; slå an en sång,
      strike up a tune or song.
    arbet|a (-ade, -at) to work, form.
    an|taga (-tog, -tagit, -tagen), to accept, suppose.
    arbete, (-t, -n), work, labor.
    arm (-en, -ar), arm.
    arm, miserable, poor.
    armring (-en, -ar), armring, bracelet.
    art (-en, -er), kind, nature.
    arv (-et, --), inheritance.
    arvgård (-en, -ar), ancestral estate.
    arving|e (-en, -ar), heir.
    asablod (-et), blood of the gods.
    asafrände (-n, -r), kinsman of the gods.
    asagäst (-en, -er), guest of the gods.
    asaljus (-et), light of the gods.
    asar (def. sing. asen) gods.
    asason (-en, -söner), son of the gods.
    aska (-n), ashes, dust.
    att, to, that.
    av, by, of, from, with.
    av och an, back and forth.
    avbild (-en, -er), image.
    av|bryta (-bröt, -brutit, -bruten), to break, interrupt.
    avfall (-et, --), desertion, apostasy.
    av|göra (-gjorde, -gjort), to decide.
    avgrund (-en, -er), abyss, precipice, hell.
    avgrundslåg|a (-an, -or), flame of hell.
    avsides, out of the way, remote.
    avsked (-et, --), farewell, dismissal.
    avstånd (-et, --), distance.
    avundsjuk, jealous.
    ax (-et, --), head of grain.
    ax|el (-eln, -lar), shoulder.

    B.

    back|e (-en, -ar), hill.
    bad (-et --), bath.
    bad, see bedja.
    bad|a (-ade, -at), to bathe.
    bak, behind.
    bakstam (-men, -mar), stern.
    baktill, behind, in the rear.
    Baldersbål (-et), Balder's pyre or stake.
    Balderslund (-en), Balder's grove.
    balk (-en, -ar), code, barrier.
    ban|a (-an, -or), course, path.
    band, see binda.
    band (-et, --), band, bond.
    bane, murderer, death by violent means.
    bannlys|a (-te, -t), to banish.
    bar, see bära.
    bar, bare.
    bara, merely, only.
    bark (-en), bark.
    barm (-en, -ar), bosom.
    barn (-et, --), child.
    barndom (-en), childhood.
    barndomsdag (-en, -ar), childhood day.
    barndomskärlek (-en), childhood love.
    barndomsminne (-t, -n), memory of childhood.
    barndomsvän (-nen, -ner), childhood friend.
    barndomsvärld (-en, -ar), childhood world.
    barnlek (-en, -ar), child's play, pl. childish games.
    barnslig, childish.
    bautasten (-en, -ar), memorial stone.
    be, abbrev. bedja.
    beckad, covered with pitch.
    becksvart, pitch black.
    bedja, be (bad, bedit or bett), to pray, ask.
    bedrift (-en, -er), achievement.
    be|driva (-drev, -drivit, -driven), to carry on.
    bedröv|a (-ade, -at), to distress, grieve.
    befallja (-de, -t), to command.
    be|grava (-grov, -gravit, -graven), to bury.
    be|gråta (-grät, -grätit, -gråten), to mourn, bewail.
    begyn|na (-te, -t), to begin.
    begär (-et --), desire.
    begär|a (-de, -t), to demand, ask.
    behag (-et), delight, charm, comeliness.
    behag|a (-ade, -at) to please.
    behärsk|a (-ade, -at), to dominate, rule.
    be|hålla (-höll, -hållit, -hållen), to retain.
    behöv|a (-de, -t), to need.
    beklag|a (-ade, -at), to deplore, pity; -- sig, complain.
    bekrans|a (-ade, -at), to deck with flowers.
    belägen, situated.
    ben (-et --), leg, bone.
    benrad (-en, -er), spinal column, skeleton.
    bereda (beredde, berett), to prepare.
    berg (-et --), mountain.
    bergfast, firm as a mountain.
    bero (-dde, -tt), to depend; på, be dependent on.
    beryktad, famous.
    berömd, famous.
    be|se (-såg, -sett, -sedd), to view, inspect.
    besegr|a (-ade, -at), to conquer.
    besinn|a (-ade, -at), to consider.
    be|sjunga (-sjöng,-sjungit, -sjungen), to praise or celebrate
    with song.
    beskrev, see beskriva.
    be|skriva (-skrev, -skrivit, -skriven), to describe.
    beslut (-et, --), decision.
    be|sluta (-slöt, -slutit), to decide.
    besmittad, unclean, infected.
    besteg, see bestiga.
    be|stiga (-steg, stigit, -stigen), to ascend.
    beställsam, officious.
    bestämd, firm, decisive.
    bestäm|ma (-de, -t), to decide, determine, designate.
    beständig, constant.
    besviken, deceived.
    besvurit, see besvärja.
    be|svärja (pres. besvär, -svor, -svurit, -svuren), to implore, adjure.
    be|sätta (-satte, -satt), to set, mount (with jewels).
    besök|a (-te, -t), to visit.
    bet, see bita.
    bet|a (-ade, -at), to graze,
    betagen, enraptured,
    betal|a (-ade, -at), to pay.
    beteckna (-ade, -at), to signify.
    beting (-et, --), condition.
    beting|a (-ade, -at), to earn, demand.
    be|tyda (-tydde, -tytt), to signify, mean.
    betänk|a (-te, -t), to reflect, ponder.
    bi (-et, -n), bee.
    bid|a (-ade, -at), to bide, wait.
    bifall (-et), permission, assent.
    bild (-en, -er), picture, scene.
    billig, reasonable, cheap.
    biltog, outlawed.
    binda, (band, pl. bundo, bundit, bunden), to bind, restrain.
    bister, grim, harsh.
    bita (bet, bitit, biten), to bite, cut, gnaw.
    bitter, bitter.
    bjuda (bjöd, bjudit, bjuden), to invite, offer, bid.
    bjudning (-en, -ar), invitation.
    bjälk|e (-en, -ar), joist, beam.
    bjöd, see bjuda.
    björk (-en, -ar), birchtree.
    björkskog (-en, -ar), birch woods.
    björn (-en, -ar), bear.
    björnhud (-en, -ar), bearskin.
    björnram (-en, -ar), paw of bear.
    björnskinnsman (-nen, -män), man clad in bearskin.
    blad (-et, --), blade, leaf.
    bland, among.
    bland|a (-ade, -at), to mix.
    blank, bright, polished.
    blek, pale.
    blekblå, pale blue.
    bleklagd, pale-faced.
    blekn|a (-ade, -at), to turn pale.
    bleknad, pale, having turned pale.
    blev, see bliva.
    bli, abbrev. of bliva.
    blick (-en, -ar), glance, look.
    blick|a (-ade, -at), to look.
    blid, gentle.
    blidk|a (-ade, -at), to propitiate.
    blind, blind.
    blindskär (-et, --), submerged rock.
    bliva, bli (blev, blivit, bliven), to become; -- efter,
      to be left behind.
    blixt (-en, -ar), lightning, thunderbolt, flash.
    blixtr|a (-ade, -at), to lighten, flash.
    blod (et), blood.
    blod|a (-ade, -at), to stain with blood.
    blodfläckad, bloodstained.
    blodig, bloody.
    blodlös, bloodless.
    blodman (-nen, -män), headsman.
    blodregn (-et), blood rain.
    blodröd, blood red.
    blodshämnd (-en), blood vengeance.
    blodörn (-en, -ar), blood eagle.
    blomdoft (-en, -er), fragrance of flowers.
    blomkalk (-en, -ar), flower cup.
    blomm|a (-ade, -at), to blossom.
    blomm|a (-an, -or), flower.
    blomster (-ret, --), flower, blossom.
    blomsterdoft (-en, -er), rose fragrance.
    blomstergördjel (-em, -lar), flower girdle.
    blomsterkransad, wreathed in flowers.
    blomsterkront, decked or crowned with flowers.
    blomstervidj|a (-an, -or), rose willow.
    blomstervärld (-en), flower world.
    blomsteräng (-en, -ar), flowery meadow or field.
    blomstr|a (-ade, -at), to blossom.
    bloss (-et,--), torch.
    blossa (-ade, -at), to blaze, flash.
    blot (-et), blood sacrifice.
    blot|a (-ade, -at), to sacrifice.
    blott, only, merely.
    blott|a (-ade, -at), to lay bare.
    blyg|as (-des, -ta), to be ashamed.
    blå, blue.
    blånande, blue.
    blånad, blue.
    blås|a (-te, -t), to blow.
    blåvit, light blue, or blue white.
    blåögd, blue-eyed.
    bländ|a (-ade, -at), to dazzle.
    blöda  (blödde, blött), to bleed.
    bo (-et, -n), dwelling place, nest.
    bo (-dde, -tt), to dwell, live.
    bock (-en, -ar), buck, he-goat.
    bog (-en, -ax), shoulder of an animal.
    bok (-en, -ar), beech tree.
    bolster (-ret, -rar), pillow, mattress.
    bona (-ade, -at), to polish.
    bonde (-n, bönder), yeoman.
    bondelag (et, --), group of yeomen.
    bondeson (-en, -söner), yeoman's son.
    boning (-en, -ar), dwelling, abode.
    bord, om --, on board.
    bord (-et, --), table.
    borg (-en, -ar), castle.
    borr|a (-ade, -at), to bore, scuttle.
    bort, borta, away.
    bot (-en, böter), fine, penance.
    bott|en (-nen, -nar), bottom.
    bottenlös, bottomless.
    bra, good, well.
    bragd (-en, -er), achievement.
    brak (-et), crash, loud noise.
    brand (-en, bränder), firebrand, fire.
    brandgul, flame-colored.
    brann, see brinna.
    bras|a (-an, -or), fire, blaze.
    brant (-en, -er), precipice, edge, declivity.
    brant, steep.
    bred, broad.
    breda (bredde, brett), to spread.
    bredvid, beside.
    bring|a (-an, -or), chest of a horse or other animal.
    bring|a (-ade or bragte, -at or bragt), to bring.
    brinna (brann, pl. brunno, brunnit, brunnen), to burn.
    brista (brast, pl. brusto, brustit, brusten), to break, to
    be lacking in; -- i gråt, to burst into tears.
    bro (-n, -ar), bridge.
    broder (-n, bröder), brother.
    brodersfamn (-en), brother's embrace.
    brokig, variegated.
    bror, contr. of broder.
    brottande (-t), wrestling.
    brott|as (-ades, -äts), to wrestle.
    brottslig, criminal.
    brud (-en, -ar), bride.
    brudgumm|e (-en, -ar), bridegroom.
    brudpar (-et, --), bridal couple.
    brudsmyckad, decked as a bride.
    brudsång (-en, -er), bridal song.
    brun, brown.
    brunno, see brinna.
    brusa (-ade, -at), to gush, roar.
    brutit, see bryta.
    bryg|ga (-de, -t), to brew.
    bryn (-et, --), edge, horizon.
    brynj|a (-an, -or), coat of mail.
    brynjohatare (-n, --), armor hater, sword.
    bryta (bröt, brutit, bruten), to break, violate.
    bräcklig, frail.
    brädd (-en, -ar), brim, edge.
    brän|na (-de, -t), to burn.
    bröd (-et, --), bread.
    brödrafred (-en), fraternal peace.
    brödren, for bröderna.
    bröllop (-et, --), wedding.
    bröllopsdag (-en, -ar), wedding day.
    bröllopsdräkt (-en, -ar), wedding costume.
    bröllopsgård (-en, -ar), house where a wedding is celebrated.
    bröst (-et, --), breast, bosom.
    bröt, see bryta.
    bud (-et, --), command, commandment, message, messenger.
    bud|a (-ade, -at), to call, summon. [stick, summons.
    budkavl|e (-en, -ar), lit. bid-
    budskap (-et, --), message.
    buk (-en, -ar), belly.
    bukt (-en, -er), bay.
    buktig, bent, convex, irregular.
    bull|er (-ret), commotion, noise.
    bunden, see binda.
    bundo, see binda.
    buro, see bära.
    busk|e (-en, -ar), bush, shrub.
    bygg|a (-de, -t), to build.
    byte (-t, -n), prize, booty.
    både, båd', both.
    båg|e (-en, -ar), bow.
    bågig, curved.
    bål, (-et, --), stake, pyre.
    bång (-et), bluster, fuss.
    bångstyrig, refractory.
    båt|a (-ade, -at), to be of avail.
    bäck (-en, -ar), brook, stream.
    bädd (-en, -ar), bed.
    bädd|a (-ade, -at), to make a bed.
    bägare (-n, --), goblet, cup.
    bägge, both.
    bälte (-t, -n), belt.
    bältestad (-en), waist line.
    bänk (-en, -ar), bench, seat.
    bär (-et, --), berry.
    bära (bar, pl. buro, burit, buren), to carry, bear, lead.
    bärga (-ade, -at), to rescue; bärgad sol, sun that has set.
    bärsärk (-en, -er), berserk.
    bärsärksgång (-en), berserk fury.
    bärsärksskägg (-et), berserk's beard.
    bäst, best.
    bättre, better.
    bävan, indecl., trepidation.
    böj|a (-de, -t), to bend.
    böjlig, flexible.
    bölj|a (-an, -or), wave, billow.
    bölja (-ade, -at), to surge.
    bön (-en, -er), prayer.
    böra (borde, bort), ought.
    börd (-en), rank.
    börd|a (-an, -or), burden.
    börj|a (-ade, -at), to begin.
    början, indecl., beginning.

    D.

    dag (-en, -ar), day.
    dag|as (-ades, -ats), to dawn,
    dag|er (-ern, -rar), dawn.
    dagg (-en), dew.
    dagglans (-en), daylight splendor.
    dagsljus (-et), daylight.
    dal (-en, -ar), valley.
    dans (-en, -ar), dance.
    dans|a (-ade, -at), to dance.
    dar, contr. of dagar.
    darr|a (-ade, -at), to tremble.
    de, they, the, those.
    del|a (-ade or -te, -at or -t), to divide, share, give.
    dem, them, those.
    den, the, that one, that, it.
    densamme, the same.
    denna, detta, this one.
    deras, their.
    dess, its; till --, until.
    desslikes, likewise.
    det, it, the, there.
    diar, no. sing., chiefs having priestly and royal functions.
    dig, you, yourself, thee, thyself.
    dikt (-en, -er), poem, fiction, invention.
    dikt|a (-ade, -at), to invent, imagine, compose.
    dimm|a (-an, -or), fog.
    din, ditt, dina, your, yours, thy, thine.
    disarsal (-en, -ar), abode of the inferior gods.
    dit, thither.
    djup (-et, --), depth; adj. deep.
    djupblå, deep blue.
    djuptänkt, profound.
    djur (-et, --), animal.
    djärv, brave.
    djärvhet (-en), bravery, presumption.
    dock, yet, nevertheless, anyway.
    dock|a (-an, -or), doll.
    dockspel (-et, --), doll's play.
    doft|a (-ade, -at), to exhale perfume, scent.
    dog, see dö.
    dom (-en, -ar), judgment, verdict.
    dom (-en, -er), dome.
    domare (-n, --), judge.
    domarsten (-en, -ar), judgment seat.
    domarstol (-en, -ar), judgment seat.
    dopp|a (-ade, -at), to dip.
    dotter (-n, döttrar), daughter.
    drag (-et, --) feature.
    dra, abbrev. of draga.
    drack, see dricka,
    draga (drog, dragit, dragen), to draw, pull, go.
    drakje (-en, -ar), dragon.
    drakskepp (-et, --), dragon ship.
    drapja (-an, -or), dirge.
    dricka (drack, pl. drucko, druckit, drucken), to drink.
    dristig, bold.
    driva (drev, drivit, driven), to drive, drift.
    driv|a (-an, -or), snow drift.
    driven, wrought, embossed.
    drog, see draga.
    dropp|a (-ade, -at), to drip.
    dropp|e (-en, -ar), dröp.
    drott (-en, -ar), king.
    drottning (-en, -ar), queen.
    drottkväde (-t, -n), royal song.
    drucko, see dricka.
    druv|a (-an, -or), grape.
    dryck (-en, -er), drink.
    dryckesbord (-et, --), drinking table.
    drunkn|a (-ade, -at), to drown.
    dryckeshorn (-et, --), drinking horn.
    dryckessal (-en, -ar), drinking hall.
    dryg, lasting, overbearing, self-important.
    dråpslag (-et, --), heavy blow, death blow.
    dräkt (-en, -en), garb.
    dräng (-en, -ar), young man, man-servant.
    dräp|a (-te, -t), to kill.
    dröj|a (-de, -t), to tarry.
    dröm (-men, -mar), dream.
    dröm|ma (-de, -t), to dream.
    du, thou.
    dubbel, double.
    dugg|a (-ade, -at), to drizzle.
    duk (-en, -ar), cloth, canvas.
    dum, foolish.
    dund|er (-ret), thunder, roar.
    dundr|a (-ade, -at), to roar, thunder.
    dunkel, dark, dim.
    duv|a (-an, -or), dove.
    duvoving|e (-en, -ar), dove's wing.
    dvaldes, see dväljas.
    dväljas (dvaldes, dvalts), to live, dwell.
    dvärg (-en, -ar), dwarf.
    dy (-n), mud, slime.
    dygd (-en, -er), virtue.
    dygn (-et, --), day of twentyfour hours.
    dyk|a (-te or dök, -t), to dive.
    dyrbar, costly.
    dyrk|a (ade, -at), to worship.
    dyrköpt, dearly bought.
    dyster, morose, gloomy.
    då, then, when.
    dåd (-et, --), deed.
    dån (-et), din, noise.
    dån|a (-ade, -at), to rumble, faint.
    dår|a (-ade, -at), to deceive, fascinate.
    dåraktig, foolish.
    dår|e (-en, -ar), fool.
    dårskap (-en, -er), foolishness.
    däck (-et, --), deck.
    däld (-en, -er), valley.
    därav, thereof.
    där, there, where.
    därefter, thereafter, thereupon.
    däremot, on the other hand.
    därför(e), therefore.
    därhos, besides, In addition.
    däri, therein.
    därifrån, therefrom.
    därigenom, thereby, through it.
    därin, in there, into it.
    därmed, thereby.
    därnäst, thereafter, next.
    däromkring, thereabout.
    därpå, thereupon, thereafter.
    därstädes, there.
    därtill, thereto.
    därunder, under or during.
    däruppe, up there.
    däruppå, thereon, upon it.
    därur, out of it.
    därutöver, beyond, above it
    däråt, in that direction, towards.
    däröver, above it.
    dö (dog, dött), to die.
    död, dead.
    död (-en, -ar), death.
    dödlig, deadly, mortal.
    dödsblek, death pale.
    dödsrunja (-an, -or), death rune,
    dödssång (-en, -er),death song,
    dödsörn (-en, -ar), death eagle,
    dölja (dolde, dolt or döljt, dold), to conceal.
    döm|a (-de, -t), to judge,
    dön|a (-ade, -at), to rumble,
    dörr (-en, -ar), door,
    dörrsven (-nen, -ner), guard,
    dörrpost (-en, -er), doorpost
    döva (-ade, -at), to deafen.

    E.

    ed (-en, -er), oath.
    eder, you, your.
    efter, after, behind.
    egen, own, peculiar.
    egg (-en, -ar), edge.
    ehur, although, albeit.
    einheriar, the blest, no sing.
    ej, not.
    eja, ah.
    ek, (-en, -ar), oak; af eke, of oak.
    ekebänk (-en, -ar), oak bench.
    eld (-en, -ar), fire.
    eldig, fiery.
    eldprov (-et, --), fire test.
    eldhav (-et, --), ocean of fire.
    eldröd, fiery red.
    eldsken (-et, --), glow of fire.
    eldstad (-en, -städer), fireplace.
    eldsvärd (-et, --), flaming sword.
    eller, or.
    emellan, between.
    emot, towards, against.
    emot|taga (-tog, -tagit, tagen), to accept, receive.
    emottog, see emottaga.
    emedan, because.
    ena, den --, one, the one.
    en, ett, a, one.
    enahanda, same.
    endast, only, solely.
    ende, enda, endaste, sole, only.
    endräkt (-en), concord.
    ens, even.
    ensam, alone.
    enslig, lonely.
    envar, everyone, each one.
    envigskamp (-en), duel.
    er, you, your.
    eriksgat|a (-an, -or), royal journey.
    ettersvälld, swelled by poison.
    evar, wheresoever.
    evig, eternal.
    evighet (-en, -er), eternity.

    F.

    fader  (-n, fäder), father.
    fager, pretty.
    falk (-en, -ar), falcon,
    falkving|e  (-en, -ar), falcon's wing.
    fall (-et, --), fall,
    falla, (föll, fallit, fallen), to fall.
    falsk, false.
    famn (-en), embrace.
    famna (-ade, -at), embrace.
    fann, see finna,
    far, abbrev. of fader,
    fara (for, farit, faren), to travel, go, depart.
    far|a (-an, -or), danger.
    fart (-en), speed, course,
    farväl, farewell.
    fas|a (-an, -or), terror,
    fast, firm.
    fast, although,
    fastän, although,
    fatt, gripa --, få --, hold, seize.
    fatt|a (-ade, -at), to seize, hold, comprehend, take.
    fatt|as (-ades, -ats), to fail, be the matter with.
    feg, cowardly.
    fejd (-en, -er), conflict.
    fel (-et, --), mistake, error.
    fel|a (-ade, -at), to err, fail.
    fem, five.
    femton, fifteen.
    fest (-en, -er), feast, entertainment.
    fick, see få.
    fiende (-n, -r), enemy.
    fik|a (-ade, -at), to seek, hanker after.
    finge, see få.
    fing|er (-ret, rar), finger.
    finna (fann, pl. funno, funnit, funnen), to find.
    finnas (fanns, funnits), to be found, exist.
    finn|e (-en, -ar), Finlander.
    fira (-ade, -at), to celebrate.
    fisk (-en, -ar), fish.
    fjord (-en, -ar), fiord, bay.
    fjäder (-ern, -rar), feather.
    fjäll (-en, -ar, or --), mountain.
    fjällig, scaly.
    fjärd (-en, -ar), bay.
    fjärde, fourth.
    fjäril (en, -ar), butterfly.
    fjärran, far away, distant.
    fjättr|a (-ade, -at), to chain.
    flagg|a (-an, -or), flag.
    flamma (-ade, -at), to flame, flare.
    flamm|a (-an, -or), flame, fire.
    flax|a (-ade, -at), to flap the wings, flicker.
    flick|a (-an, -or) girl.
    flintkniv (-en, -ar), flint knife.
    flitig, diligent.
    flockvis, in flocks.
    flod (-en, -er), river.
    flugen, see flyga.
    flutit, see flyta.
    fly (-dde, -tt), to flee.
    flyga, (flög, flugit, flugen), to fly, speed.
    flykt (-en), flight.
    flykt|a (-ade, -at), to flee.
    flyktig, flighty, evanescent.
    flyta (flöt, flutit, fluten), to flow, drift, float.
    fläck (-en, -ar), spot, blemish.
    fläck|a (-ade, -at), to tarnish.
    fläcklös, spotless.
    fläkt (-en, -ar), breeze, gust of wind.
    flärd (-en), vanity, deceit.
    fläsk (-et), pork.
    flät|a (-ade, -at), to braid.
    flöd|a (-ade, -at), to flow, pour.
    flög, see flyga.
    flöt, see flyta.
    fnys|a (-te, or fnös, -t), to sniff, snort.
    fnös, see fnysa.
    fog|a (-ade, -at), to join, -- hop, to join together.
    folk (et, --), people.
    for, see fara.
    fordom, formerly.
    fordr|a (-ade, -at), to demand.
    fordran, indecl., demand.
    forna, former.
    forntid  (-en), antiquity, former time.
    forntidabild (-en, -er), ancient image.
    forntidsminne (-t, -n), memory of the past.
    fors (-en, -ar), rapids, current.
    fort, fast, hurriedly.
    fosterbroder (-n, -bröder), fosterbrother.
    fosterdotter (-ern, -döttrar), fosterdaughter.
    fosterfader (-n, -fäder), fosterfather.
    fosterjord (-en), native soil.
    fosterson (-en, -söner), fosterson.
    fostrare (-n, --), fosterer.
    fot (-en, fötter), foot.
    fradga (-n), foam.
    fragga, see fradga.
    fram, forth, along.
    fram|bryta (-bröt, -brutit), to advance, press forth.
    framför|a (-de, -t), to deliver, bring.
    framför(e), before, in front of.
    framme, at destination, there.
    framsus|a (-ade, -at), to murmur, rustle forth.
    fred (-en), peace.
    fredlig, peaceable.
    frestare (-n, --), tempter.
    frestelse  (-n, -r), temptation.
    fri, free.
    fri|a (-ade, -at), to court, woo.
    friare (-n, --), wooer.
    friboren, freeborn.
    frid (-en), peace.
    fridlyst, protected, inviolate.
    fridlös, peaceless, outlawed.
    fridsam, peaceable.
    fridsbud (-et, --), peace messenger, message of peace.
    fridsmö (-n, -r), peace maiden.
    fridsäll, peaceable, peace loving.
    frieri (-et, -er), courtship.
    frihet (-en, -er) liberty, freedom.
    frisk, healthy, fresh.
    fristad (-en, -städer), haven of refuge.
    frod|as (-ades, -ats), to flourish, grow, luxuriate.
    from, pious.
    fromhet (-en), piety.
    fromhetsgud (-en), god of piety.
    fromma, indecl., gain, advantage.
    fross|a (-ade, -at), to revel, gormandize.
    fru (-n, -ar), lady, wife.
    frukt (-en, -er), fruit.
    frukt|a (-ade, -at), to fear.
    frust|a (-ade, -at), to snort, sputter.
    frysa (frös, frusit, frusen), to freeze.
    fråg|a (-ade, -at), to ask.
    fråg|a (-an, or), question.
    från, from.
    fräck, brazen.
    fräls|a (-ade or -te, -at or -t), to save, rescue.
    främling (-en, -ar), stranger.
    främmande, strange.
    främst, foremost.
    frände (-n, -r), male relative.
    fränk|a (-an, -or), female relative.
    fräs|a (-te, -t), to frizzle, sputter, foam.
    frö (-et, -n), seed.
    fröjd (-en, -er), joy, pleasure.
    full, full.
    fullbräddad, filled to the brim.
    fullvuxen, full grown.
    fulländ|a (-ade, -at), to complete.
    funno, see finna.
    fur|a (-an, -or), fir, pine; av furu, of pine wood.
    furst|e (-en, -ar), prince.
    fyll|a (-de, -t), to fill.
    fyllig, plump.
    fyra, four.
    få, few.
    få (fick, pl. fingo, fått), to get, be allowed, receive, be compelled.
    fåfäng, vain.
    fåg|el (-eln, -lar), bird.
    fågelbo (-et, -n), bird's nest.
    fåkunnig, ignorant.
    fål|e (-en, -ar), colt, steed.
    fåll|a (-ade), to hem.
    fång|a (-ade, -at, -ad or fången), to capture.
    får (-et, --), sheep.
    fäder (pl. of fader, father), ancestors.
    fädernedal (-en, -ar), native valley.
    fädernesland (-et, --), native country.
    fädernestrand (-en, -stränder), native shore.
    fägn|a (-ade, -at), to please.
    fäll|a (-de, -t), to strike down, fell.
    fält (-et, --), field.
    färd (-en, -er), journey; å färde, on the way, pending.
    färdig, ready.
    färg (-en, -er), color.
    färg|a (-ade, -at), to color.
    färglös, colorless.
    fäst|a (-ade, -at), to fasten, bind, attach.
    fäste (-t, -n), stronghold, hilt, firmament.
    fästning (-en, -ar), fortification.
    föda (födde, fött), to give birth to, nourish.
    födelse or födsel (-n), birth.
    föga, little.
    följ|a (-de, -t), to follow, accompany.
    föll, see falla.
    fönst|er (-ret, --), window.
    för, for, before, in behalf of.
    för (-en), prow.
    för|a (-de, -t), to bring, conduct.
    förakt|a (-ade, -at), to despise.
    föraktlig, scornful, despicable.
    förbannelse (-n, -r), curse.
    förbi, past.
    för|binda (-band, pl. -bundo, -bundit, -bunden), to bandage, unite.
    förbittrad, incensed.
    förbittring (-en), anger.
    förblev, see förbliva
    för|bliva (-blev, -blivit, -bliven), to remain.
    för|blöda (-blödde, -blött), to bleed to death.
    förbrän|na (-de, -t), to consume by fire.
    fördjup|a (-ade, -ät), de deepen.
    fördraga (-drog, -dragit, -dragen), to tolerate.
    fördunkl|a (-ade, -at) to make dim.
    föröm|a (-de, -t), to condemn.
    före, before.
    förebild (-en, -er), prototype, model.
    fören|a (-ade or -te, -at or -t), to unite.
    förening (-en, -ar), union.
    förespel (-et, --), prelude.
    förespråkersk|a (-an, -or), female pleader, advocate.
    före|stå (-stod, -stått), to be near at hand, be imminent.
    för|flyta (-flöt, -flutit, -fluten), to pass by, elapse.
    för|frysa (-frös, -frusit, -frusen), to freeze severely.
    förfärlig, terrible.
    förfölj|a (-de, -t), to pursue.
    förglöm|ma (-de, -t), to forget.
    för|gråta (-grät, -gråtit,) to pass the time in weeping; förgråten,
      red-eyed or swollen from weeping.
    för|gå (-gick, -gått, -gången), to pass by (time); förgås, to perish.
    förgård (-en, -ar), outer court.
    förgäten, forgotten.
    förgäves, in vain.
    förgöm|ma (-de, -t), to conceal.
    förhand, på --, beforehand.
    förhoppning (-en, -ar), hope, expectation.
    förhoppningsfull, hopeful.
    förjag|a (-ade, -at), to drive away.
    förkast|a (-ade, -at), to reject.
    förklar|a (-ade, -at), to explain.
    för|kläda (-klädde, -klätt), to disguise, masque.
    förklädning (-en, -ar), disguise.
    förlama (-ade, -at), to paralyze.
    förliden, past.
    förlik|a (-te, -t), to reconcile.
    förlit|a (-ade, or förlet, -at), to depend upon.
    förlor|a (-ade, -at), to lose.
    förlov, med --, pardon me.
    för|låta (-lät, -låtit, -låten), to forgive.
    förlät, see förlåta.
    förmörk|a (-ade, -at), to darken.
    förnam, see förnimma.
    för|nimma, (-nam, -nummit, -nummen), to hear, perceive, ascertain.
    förnummit, see förnimma.
    förny|a (-ade, -at), to renew.
    förnöj|a (-de, -t), to please.
    förolämpad, insulted.
    förpläg|a (-ade, -at), to feed, entertain.
    förr, before, formerly.
    för|råda (-rådde, -rått, rådd), to betray.
    förrän, förrn, before, until.
    förrost|a (-ade, -at), to rust.
    försak|a (-ade, -at), to renounce, deny oneself.
    församl|a (-ade, -at), to gather, assemble.
    för|sjunka (-sjönk, -sjunkit, -sjunken), to sink down,
    försjönk, see försjunka.
    för|skjuta (-sköt, -skjutit, -skjuten), to reject.
    försmå (-dde, -tt), to disdain.
    för|smälta (-smalt, -smultit), to melt.
    förson|a (-ade, -at), to propitiate.
    försonare (-n, --), propitiator.
    försoning (-en), atonement, reconciliation.
    försoningsdag (-en, -ar), day of atonement.
    för|sova, sig (-sov, sovit), to oversleep.
    först, first.
    förströ (-dde, -tt), to divert, amuse.
    förlstå (-stod, -stått, -stådd), to understand.
    förstäm|ma (-de, -t), to depress.
    förstör|a (-de, -t), to destroy.
    försvann, see försvinna.
    försvar|a (-ade, -at), to defend.
    försvinna (-svann, pl. -svunno, -svunnit, -svunnen), to disappear.
    försök|a (-te, -t), to try.
    förtäl|a (-ade, -at), to relate, slander.
    försvunnit, see försvinna.
    förteg, see förtiga.
    för|tiga (-teg, -tegat), to conceal, keep back.
    förtjust, pleased, delighted.
    förtjän|a (-ade, -at), to earn, deserve.
    förtjänst (-en, -er), merit.
    fortork|a (-ade, -at), to dry up, wither.
    förtro (-dde, -tt), to entrust, confide.
    förtrogen (vän), confidential friend.
    fortroll|a (-ade, -at), to bewitch.
    förtryck[a (-te, -t), to oppress.
    förtyn|a (-ade, -at), to waste away.
    förtälj|a (-de, or förtaide, -t, or förtalt), to relate, tell.
    förtörn|a (-ade, -at), to anger, vex.
    föränderlig, changeable.
    forundr|a (-ade, -at), to fill with wonder; -- sig, to wonder, marvel.
    förut, before.
    förutan, without.
    forvirr|a (-ade, -at), to confuse, confound.
    förvågen, reckless.
    förvägr|a (-ade, -at), to refuse.
    förändr|a (-ade, -at), to change.
    för|öda (-ödde, -ött), to waste.

    G.

    gagn|a (-ade, -at), to benefit.
    gala (gol, galit), to crow.
    galder (-n, galdrar), incantation.
    galt (-en, -ar), boar.
    gammal, old.
    gamman, indecl., pleasure, joy.
    gap (-et, --), mouth, jaws.
    gapa (-ade, -at), to yawn, gape.
    gav, see giva.
    geirsodd (-en), death rune.
    gemensam, common, mutual.
    gen, short, near.
    genast, at once.
    genmäl|a (-de, -t), to retort.
    genom, through.
    genomborr|a (-ade, -at), to pierce, thrust through.
    genomströmm|a (-ade, -at), to flow through.
    gestalt (-en, -er), figure, body.
    gick, see gå.
    giftoman (-nen, -män), one who gives another in marriage.
    giljarfärd (-en, -er), wooing trip or expedition.
    ginge, gingo, see gå.
    gissning (-en, -ar), guess.
    giva, ge (gav, g&vo, givit, given), to give.
    givmild, generous.
    gjallarhorn (-et), giallarhorn, the trumpet of Heimdall.
    gjord, see göra.
    gjuta (göt, gjutit, gjuten), to pour, mold, shed.
    glad, glad, happy, merry.
    gladde, see glädja.
    glans (-en), splendor,
    glasrut|a (-an, -or), window pane.
    glatt, smooth.
    glesn|a (-ade, -at), to grow sparse.
    glittr|a (-ade, -at), to glitter.
    glädja (pr. gläder, gladde, glatt), to make glad, rejoice.
    gläder, see glädja.
    glädje (-n), joy.
    glättig, glad, happy.
    glöd (-en), glow.
    glöda (glödde, glött), to glow.
    glödhet, glowing hot.
    glöm|ma (-de -t), to forget.
    glömska (-n), oblivion, forgetfulness.
    gnist|a (-an, -or), spark.
    gnistr|a (-ade, -at), to sparkle.
    gnugga (-ade, -at), to rub.
    gny (-et), commotion, murmur.
    gnägg|a (-ade, -at), to neigh.
    god, good.
    godo, med or i --, willingly.
    gods (-et, --), goods, property.
    golv (-et, --), floor.
    grav (-en, -ar), grave.
    gravhög (-en, -ar), barrow, grave mound.
    gravöl (-et), funeral feast.
    gren (-en, -ar), branch.
    grep, see gripa.
    griff|el (-eln, -lar), pencil.
    grift (-en, -er), grave.
    gripa (grep, gripit, gripen), to seize.
    gro (-dde, -tt), to sprout, grow.
    groll (-et), grudge, quarrel.
    grop (-en, -ar), dimple, pit.
    grovhyvlad, rough planed.
    grubb|la (-ade, -at), to brood.
    gruml|a (-ade, -at), to make turbid.
    grund, shallow.
    grund (-et, --), shoal; till --, to the bottom.
    grund (-en, -er), basis, foundation.
    grundmurad, provided with solid floor and walls of masonry.
    grus, (-et), gravel, earth, i -- in ruins.
    gry (-de, -tt), to dawn, break.
    grym, fierce, cruel.
    gråhårig, grayhaired.
    gråskäggig, having gray beard.
    gråta (grät, gråtit), to weep.
    gråtersk|a (-an, -or), woman who weeps.
    gräns (-en, -er), boundary, limit.
    gräs (-et), grass.
    gräselig or gräslig, hideous.
    grät, see gråta.
    grön, green.
    grönklädd, covered with verdure.
    grönlummig, leafy, with dense foliage.
    grönsk|a (-ade, -at), to turn or grow green.
    grönska (-n), verdure.
    grönvirkad, crocheted in green.
    gubb|e (-en, -ar), old man.
    gud (-en, -ar), god.
    gudabarm (-en, -ar), divine bosom.
    gudablod (-et), blood of the gods, of divine ancestry.
    gudabälte (-t, -n), divine girdle.
    gudaglans (-en), divine splendor.
    gudahus (-et, --), temple.
    gudakrans (-en, -ar), divine wreath.
    gudalund (-en, -ar or -er), sacred grove.
    gudatimrad, god-built.
    gudinn|a (-an, -or), goddess.
    gudomlig, divine.
    gul, yellow, golden.
    guld, gull (-et), gold.
    guldbelagd, gold inlaid.
    guldfot (-en, -fötter), gold foot.
    guldgul, golden yellow.
    guldhjälm, (-en, -ar), gold helmet.
    guldhov (-en, -ar), gold-shod hoof.
    guldinlagd, gold inlaid.
    guldkam (-men, -mar), golden comb.
    guldkammig, golden combed.
    guldklo (-n, -r), golden claw.
    guldring (-en, -ar), gold ring.
    guldsadlad, with gold-mounted saddle.
    guldsköld (-en, -ar), gold shield.
    guldstol (-en, -ar), golden chair or seat.
    guldsträng (-en, -ar), gold string.
    guldtand (-en, -tänder), golden tooth.
    gull, see guld.
    gullhov, see guldhov.
    gullmanig, with golden mane.
    guln|a (-ade, -at), to turn yellow.
    gung|a (-ade, -at), to rock.
    gyllene, golden.
    gyllenläder (-ret), gilded leather, bronze leather.
    gå (gick, pl. gingo, gått, gången), to go, extend, move.
    gång (-en, -ar), path, walk, course.
    gång (-en, -er), time, occasion.
    gångare (-n, --), steed, horse.
    går, i --, yesterday.
    gård (-en, -ar), homestead, estate, yard.
    gåv|a (-an, -or), gift.
    gåvo, see giva.
    gäck|a (-ade, -at), to scorn, deceive.
    gäld|a (-ade, -at), to make amends for.
    gäll|a (-de, -t), to be of account, -- lifvet, life is at stake.
    gärd (-en, -er), tribute, reward.
    gärna, willingly, freely.
    gäst (-en, -er), guest.
    gäst|a (-ade, -at), to visit as guest.
    gästabud (-et, --), banquet, feast.
    gästfri, hospitable.
    gästfrihet (-en), hospitality.
    gäl (-en, -ar), pool.
    gäm|ma (-de, -t), to conceal.
    gära (gjorde, gjort, gjord), to do, make.
    gärd|el (-eln, -lar), girdle,
    göt, see gjuta.

    H.

    ha, abbrev. of hava.
    hag|e (-en, -ar), pasture, grove.
    hade, see hava.
    hagelskur (-en, -ar), shower of hail, hail storm.
    hagl|a (-ade, -at), to hail.
    halm (-en), straw.
    hak|a (-ade, -at), to hook.
    hals (-en, -ar), neck.
    halt|a (-ade, -at), to limp, hobble.
    halv, half.
    halvbränd, half burnt.
    halvdränkt, half submerged.
    halvrund (-en, -er), semicircle.
    halvslocknad, half extinguished.
    halvsläckt, half extinguished.
    halvvred, vexed, angry.
    hammare (-n, -- or hamrar), hammer.
    hamn (-en, -ar), harbor.
    hamr|a (ade, -at), to hammer.
    han, he.
    hand (-en, händer), hand.
    handfull, handful.
    handkraft (-en), physical power.
    handsbred, one hand wide.
    handslag (-et, --), hand clasp.
    han|e (-en, -ar), cock.
    hang, see hänga,
    hann, see hunno.
    hans, his.
    harm (-en), anger.
    harp|a (-an, -or), harp.
    harpoljud (-et, --), sound of the harp.
    harpoton (-en, -er), tone of the harp.
    hast, haste.
    hast|a (-ade, -at), to hasten.
    hastig, speedy.
    hat (-et), hatred.
    hat|a (-ade, -at), to hate.
    hatt (-en, -ar), hat.
    hav (-et, --), ocean.
    hava, ha (hade, haft), to have.
    havsbrud (-en, -ar), ocean bride.
    havsskum (-met), ocean spray.
    havstroll (-et, --), sea monster.
    havsval (-en, -ar), whale.
    havsörn (-en, -ar), sea eagle.
    hed (-en, -ar), heath.
    heden, heathen.
    heder (-n), honor.
    hedersgubb|e (-en, -ar), worthy or venerable old man.
    hejsan, hey, hurrah.
    hel, whole, entire.
    helt, quite, entirely.
    helgedom (-en, -ar), temple.
    helig, sacred, holy.
    hell, hail.
    heller, either.
    hellre, helst, rather, more or most willingly.
    helstekt, roasted whole.
    hem (-met, --), home.
    hembygd (-en, -er), native place.
    hemma, at home.
    hemsk, terrible.
    hemväg, (-en, -ar), the way home.
    henne, acc. of hon, her.
    hennes, gen. of hon, hers.
    hermelin (-en), ermine.
    hermelinsmantlad, ermine mantled.
    herr, sir.
    herr|e (-en, -ar), master, lord.
    het, warm.
    het|a (-te, -at), to be called, named.
    hillebard (-en, -er), halberd.
    himlabåg|e (-en, -ar), heavenly arch.
    himlaflamm|a (-an, -or), lightning flash.
    himlarand (-en), horizon.
    him|mel (-meln, -len or -melen, -lar), heaven, sky.
    himmelsk, heavenly.
    himmelsblå, azure blue.
    himlafält (-et, --), firmament, sky.
    hin, the.
    hind (-en, -ar), hind, young deer.
    hind|er (-ret, --), hindrance, obstacle.
    hindr|a (-ade, -at), to hinder.
    hingst (-en, -ar), stallion.
    hinna (hann, pl hunno, hunnit, hunnen), to have time for, overtake.
    hinsidan, on the other side.
    hiss|a (-ade, -at), to hoist; -- segel, to set sail.
    hit, hither.
    hitt|a (-ade, -at), to find.
    hjalt (-et, --), hilt.
    hjord (-en, -ar), flock.
    hjort (-en, -ar), stag.
    hjul (-et, --), wheel.
    hjälm (-en, -ar), helmet.
    hjälmhatt (-en, -ar), helmet, helmet hat.
    hjälp|a (-te, or halp, -t, or hulpit, hulpen), to assist, help.
    hjält|e (-en, -ar), hero.
    hjälteamma (-an, -or), mother of heroes.
    hjältearm (-en, -ar), heroic arm.
    hjältebarm (-en, -ar), heroic bosom.
    hjälteblick (-en, -ar), heroic glance.
    hjältefader (-n, -fäder), heroic father, father of heroes.
    hjältebragd (-en, -er), heroic deed.
    hjältefog (-et), heroic tone or mien.
    hjältekraft (-en), heroic power.
    hjältemod (-et), heroic courage.
    hjältemull (-en), heroic soil, dust of heroes.
    hjälterykte (-t), heroic fame.
    hjältesinne (-t), heroic mind.
    hjälteson (-en, söner), heroic son, son of a hero.
    hjältesång (-en, -er), heroic song.
    hjältevrede (-n), heroic anger.
    hjärta (-t, -n), heart.
    hjärtlig, hearty, sincere.
    hjäss|a (-an, -or), crown of the head.
    holmgång (-en, -ar), duel.
    hon, she.
    honom, acc. of han, him.
    honungG (-en), honey.
    hop (-en, -ar), crowd, throng.
    hopfog|a (-ade, -at), to join together.
    hopp (-et, --), leap.
    hopp (-et), faith, hope.
    hopp|a (-ade, -at), to jump.
    hopp|as (-ades, -ats), to hope.
    hopträng|a (-de, -t), to compress.
    horn (-et, --), horn.
    horndryck (-en), drink from the horn.
    hos, by, with, at the home of.
    hot (-et), threat.
    hot|a (-ade, -at), to threaten.
    hov (-en, -ar), hoof.
    hov (-et, --), court.
    hov, see häva.
    hovman (-nen, -män), courtier.
    hud (-en, -ar), skin, pelt.
    hugg (-et, --), blow, thrust, stroke.
    hugga (högg, huggit, huggen), to hew, cut, strike.
    hull (-et), flesh.
    hulling (-en, -ar), barb, hook.
    hulpit, see hjälpa.
    humle (-n), hops.
    hund (-en, -ar), dog.
    hundra, hundrade, hundred.
    hundramilaslätt (-en, -er), plain of a hundred miles.
    hundraårig, a hundred years old.
    hungrig, hungry.
    hunnit, see hinna.
    hur, huru, how, howsoever.
    hus (-et, --), house, dwelling.
    husfolk (-et, --), house servants.
    husvill, homeless.
    huvud (-et, -en), head.
    huvudskall|e (-en, -ar), skull.
    hucklare (-n, --), hypocrite.
    håg (-en), mind, inclination.
    hål (-et, --), hole.
    håll (-et, --), direction.
    hålla (höll, hållit, hållen), to hold, keep, contain.
    hållning (-en), bearing.
    hån (-et), scorn.
    hår (-et, --), hair.
    hård, hard, cruel, severe.
    hårdhet (-en), hardness, harshness.
    hårdhänt, rough, severe.
    hårvuxen, hairy.
    häg|er (-ern, -rar), heron.
    hägn|a (-ade, -at), to protect.
    hägring (-en, -ar), mirage.
    hälft (-en, -er), a half.
    häll (-en, -ar), hearth, rock.
    häls|a (-ade, -ät), ta greet, acclaim.
    hälsa, (-n), health.
    hälsning (-en, -ar), greeting.
    hämnd (-en), revenge.
    hämn|a (-ade, -at), to avenge.
    hämt|a (-ade, -at), to bring, fetch.
    hän, away.
    hän|da (-de, -t), to happen.
    häng|a (-de, or hang, -t), to häng.
    hänglås (-et, --), padlock.
    hänryckning (-en), ecstasy.
    häpen, astounded.
    här, here.
    här (-en, -ar), army.
    härbud (-et, --), war messenger, or message.
    härd (-en, -ar), hearth.
    härd|a (-ade, -at), to harden.
    härinne, in here.
    härj|a (-ade, -at), to devastate.
    härlig, glorious, beautiful.
    härmed, herewith.
    härnad (-en, -er), warfare, warlike expedition.
    härold (-en, -er), herald.
    härom, concerning it.
    härskarbud (-et, -en), word of command.
    härskarblick (-en, -ar), lordly mien, glance of a ruler.
    härskarnyck (-en, -er), whim of authority.
    härskarord (-et, -en), royal command, word of authority.
    härskri (-et, --, or -n), warcry.
    härsköld (-en, -ar), war shield.
    härslag (-et,--), battle.
    härtåg (-et, --), military expedition.
    häst (-en, -ar), horse.
    häv|a (-de, -t), to raise, lift, rise and fall.
    hävd (-en, -er), annals.
    höft (-en, -er), hip,
    hög (-en, -ar),mound, pile, grave.
    hög, high, loud.
    högbarmad, high-bosomed.
    högg, see hugga.
    högbänk (-en, -ar), high seat, seat of honor.
    höghornad, long-horned.
    högre, higher.
    högsätespelare (-n, --), pillar of the high seat, or seat of honor.
    högvälvd, high arched.
    högättad, of high descent.
    höj|a (-de, -t), to raise, lift.
    höjd (-en, -er), height, eminence.
    hök (-en, -ar), hawk.
    hölj|a (-de, -t), to cover.
    höll, see hålla.
    hör|a (-de, -t), to hear, listen. -- samman, belong together,
      -- till, belong to.
    höst (-en, -ar), autumn.
    höstting (-et, --), fall thing or court.
    höv|as (-des, -ts), to be fitting,
    hövding (-en, -ar), chief.
    hövisk, courtly, polite.

    I.

    i, you.
    i, in, into, at, for, to, by, with.
    ibland, among, sometimes.
    icke, not.
    idel, nothing but.
    idrott (-en, -er), sport, achievement.
    ifrån, from.
    igen, again.
    igenkän|na (-de, -t), to recognize.
    igenom, through.
    ihjäl, to death; slå ----, to kill.
    ihop, together.
    il (-en, -ar), gust of wind.
    il|a (-ade, -at), to run fast.
    illa, bad, evil.
    in, in, on.
    in|driva (-drev, -drivit, -driven), to collect.
    inför, before, face to face with.
    ingen, no, no one, none.
    ingenting, nothing.
    in|giva (-gav, pl. gåvo, -givit, -given), to give, inspire.
    innan, before, ere.
    innanför, within.
    inne, in, within.
    inom, within.
    insteg, see instiga.
    in|stiga (-steg, -stigit, -stigen), to enter.
    insvep|a (-te, -t), to envelop, dress.
    in|taga (-tog, -tagit, -tagen), to seize, take possession of.
    intet, nothing.
    intill, to, unto.
    intog, see intaga.
    in|träda (-trädde, -trätt), to enter.
    inunder, under.
    invid, by, close to.
    invän|da (-de, -t), to interpose objection, answer.
    irr|a (-ade, -at), to wander about aimlessly.
    is (-en, -ar), ice.
    isbjörn (-en, -ar), polar bear.
    itu, in twain.
    iver (-n), zeal, animation.


    J.

    jag, I.
    jag|a (-ade, -at), to hunt, chase, drive.
    jakt (-en, -er), hunt.
    jarl (-en, -ar), jarl, earl.
    joll|er (-ret), foolish prattle.
    jord (-en), earth, soil.
    jordisk, earthly.
    jul (-en, -ar), yule.
    jul|a (-ade, -at), to celebrate yule.
    julerus (-et, ----), yuletide spree.
    jungfru (-n, -r), maiden, virgin.
    jungfrubur (-en, -ar), maiden's bower.
    just, just, exactly.
    juv|er (-ret, ----), udder.
    jägare (-n, ----), hunter.
    jägarskar|a (-an, -or), band of hunters.
    jämnårig, of the same age.
    jämt, always.
    jämte, by, also, besides.
    jämväl, besides.
    järn (-et), iron.
    järnek (-en, -ar), holly oak.
    järnfast, firm or strong as iron.
    järnlans (-en, -ar), iron lance.
    järnsko (-n, -r), iron shoe.
    jätt|e (-en, -ar), giant.
    jättesten (-en, -ar), giant rock.
    jätteverk (-et, ----), giant undertaking.


    K.

    kalk|a (-ade, -at), to cover with lime.
    kall, cold.
    kall|a (-ade, -at), to call.
    kall|as (-ades, -ats), to be named.
    kallbräckt, cold-short, brittle.
    kalln|a (-ade, -at), to grow cold.
    kam (-men, -mar), comb.
    kamin (-en, -er), stove.
    kammar(e) (-n, --), chamber.
    kamp (-en), struggle.
    kamrat (-en, -er), comrade.
    kan, see kunna.
    kanhända, perhaps.
    kanske, perhaps.
    kant, (-en, -er), border.
    kapp, i --, in a race.
    kapp|a (-an, -or), mantle, cloak, hood.
    karg, chary.
    karm (-en, -ar), back and arms of a chair.
    kast|a (-ade, -at), to cast, throw.
    kedj|a (-an, -or), chain.
    kind (-en, -er), cheek.
    klag|a (-ade, -at), to complain.
    klagan, indecl., complaint.
    klagoröst (-en, -er), voice of complaint.
    klandr|a (-ade, -at), to criticise.
    klang, see klinga.
    klang (-en), ring, clang.
    klapp|a (-ade, -at), to clap, beat, knock.
    klar, clear.
    klarnad, clear.
    klenod, (-en, -er), gem, jewel, valuable.
    kling|a (-ade or klang, pl. klungo, -at or klungit), to resound,
    drink a toast.
    kling|a (-an, -or), sword.
    klint (-en, -er), peak, brow of rock.
    klipp|a (-an, -or), cliff, rock.
    klipp|g, rocky.
    klo (-n, -r) claw.
    klok, wise.
    klot (-et, --), sphere, ball.
    klungo, see klinga.
    klyft|a (-an, or), cleft, ravine.
    klyva (klöv, kluvit, kluven), to cleave, split.
    kläda (klädde, klätt), to clothe.
    kläder, no sing., clothes,
    kläm|ma (-de, -t), to squeeze, press.
    klättr|a (-ade, -at), to climb,
    klösja (-te, -t), to tear with claws or nails.
    klöv, see klyva.
    knak|a (-ade, -at), to creak.
    knapp, scarce.
    knapp (-en, -ar), button, knob.
    knappast, hardly.
    knattr|a (-ade, at), to crackle.
    knopp (-en, -ar), bud.
    knopp|as (-ades, -ats), to bud.
    knot (-et), complaint.
    knuten, see knyta.
    knyta (knöt, knutit, knuten), to tie, bind.
    knä (-et, -n), knee.
    knäpp|a (-te, -t), to fasten, buckle; -- händerna, clasp the hands.
    knäsatt, placed in one's lap.
    kog|er (-ret, --), quiver.
    koka (-ade, -at), to boil.
    kolsvart, coal black.
    kolv (-en, -ar), butt.
    komma (kom, kommit, kommen), to come, get, -- fram, come up, forth,
      arrive.
    konst (-en, -er), art.
    konstnär (-en, -er), artist.
    konstarbetad, artistically wrought.
    konsterfaren, skilled, artistic.
    konstfull, artistic.
    konstnär (-en, -er), artist.
    konung (-en, -ar), king.
    konungasal (-en, -ar), king's hall.
    konungason, (-en, -söner), king's son.
    konungastad (-en, -städer), royal city.
    konungaval (-et, --), royal election.
    kopparköl (-en, -ar), copper keel.
    kopparstöpt, molded in copper.
    koppartrösk|el (-eln, -lar), copper threshold.
    kor|a (-ade, -at), to choose.
    korall (-en, -er), coral.
    korn, (-et), barley, grain.
    kornland (-et, --), field of grain.
    kors|a (-ade, -at), to cross.
    kort, short; inom --, shortly, ere long, soon.
    kos, gå, fly sin --, depart.
    kos|a (-an, -or), course.
    kost|a (-ade, -at), to cost.
    kostelig, costly, precious.
    krafs|a (-ade, -at), to scratch.
    kraft (-en, -er), power, strength.
    kraftlös, powerless.
    kram (-et), merchandise, gimcrack, trumpery, trash.
    krans (-en, -ar), wreath.
    krets (-en, -ar), circle.
    krig (-et, --), war.
    kring, round, around, about.
    kringdans|a (-ade, -at) to dance around.
    kring|stryka (-strök, -strukit), to roam about.
    kringsvärm|a (-ade, -at), to roam about.
    kringång|a (-ade, -at), surround by perfume.
    kroknäbb (-et, --), hook-bill, one having a crooked beak.
    kron|a (-an, -or), crown.
    kropp (-en, -ar), body.
    kross|a (ade, -at), to crush.
    kryck|a (-an, -or), crutch.
    krämare (-n, --), merchant, trader.
    kränk|a (-te, -t), to insult, wrong.
    kräv|a (-de, -t), to exact, demand.
    krökt, bent, crooked.
    krön|a (-te, -t), to crown, adore.
    kul|a (-an, -or), cave, den.
    kulen, bleak.
    kull|e (-en, -ar), knoll, hill.
    kum|mel (-let, --), funeral mound, cairn.
    kung (-en, -ar), king.
    kungablod (-et), royal blood.
    kungadotter (-n, -döttrar), king's daughter.
    kungaed (-en, -er), royal oath.
    kungahus (-et, --), king's house, royal house.
    kungahöghet (-en), royal greatness.
    kungasal (-en, -ar), royal hall.
    kungason (-en, -söner), king's son.
    kungastol (-en, -ar), royal seat.
    kungaval (-et, --), royal election.
    kungasäte (-t, -n), royal seat.
    kunglig, royal.
    kungsgård (-en, -ar), king's hall or estate.
    kungsniding (-en, -ar), traitor king.
    kungsord (-et, --), royal word.
    kungssal (-en, -ar), king's hall.
    kunna (pres. kan, kunde, kunnat), to be able, can, know.
    kupig, convex.
    kust (-en, -er), coast, shore.
    kuttr|a (-ade, -at), to coo.
    kvald, see kvälja.
    kvar, remaining, left.
    kvar|bliva (-blev, -blivit, -bliven), to remain.
    kvar|hålla (-höll, -hållit, -hållen), to retain, keep.
    kvarhöll, see kvarhålla.
    kvav, sultry, close; gå i --, go to the bottom.
    kvickn|a (-ade, -at) vid, to revive, come to life again.
    kvida (kved, kvidit), to wail, whine.
    kvinn|a (-an, -or), woman.
    kvinnoskepnad (-en, -er), woman's form.
    kvist (-en, -ar), branch.
    kvittr|a (-ade, -at), to twitter.
    kväda (kvad, kvädit, kväden), to sing, speak.
    kväde (-t, -n), song.
    kvälj|a (-de or kvalde, kvalt, kvald), to choke, torment.
    kväll (-en, -ar), evening.
    kväv|a (-de, -t), to suffocate, quench.
    kyl|a (-de, -t), to cool.
    kyss|a (-te, -t), to kiss.
    käck, brave, spirited.
    käll|a (-an, -or), spring, fountain.
    källare (-n, --), cellar.
    kämp|a (-ade, -at), to fight, struggle.
    kämp|e (-en, -ar), warrior.
    kämpehand (-en, -händer), heroic hand.
    kämpehär (-en, -ar), army of warriors.
    känd, known.
    kän|na (-de, -t), to know, feel.
    känsl|a (-an, -or), feeling.
    kär, dear.
    kärl (-et, --), vessel.
    kärlek (-en), love.
    kärleksbrev (-et, --), love letter.
    kärleksfull, loving.
    kärn|a (-an, -or), kernel.
    kärnfull, rich, pithy.
    kärnfur (-an, -or), sound fir tree.
    kärnspråk (-et, --), wise saying.
    köl (-en, -ar), keel.
    köld (-en), cold.
    kör|a (-de, -t), to drive.

    L.

    lack|a (-ade, -at), to drip (of perspiration).
    lad|a (-an, -or), barn, granary.
    laddning (-en, -ar), cargo.
    lade, see lägga.
    lag (-en, -ar), law.
    lag (-et, --), group, crowd.
    lagerlund (-en, -ar), laurel grove.
    lamm|m (-met, --), lamb.
    land (-et, länder or --), land.
    landsflykt (-en), exile.
    lans (-en, -ar), lance.
    larm (-et), noise, din.
    larm|a (-ade, -at), to make noise.
    le (log, lett), smile, laugh.
    led, mean, ugly.
    led, see lida.
    leda (ledde, lett), to lead, direct.
    ledig, vacant.
    ledsen, sad; --vid, weary of.
    lek (-en, -ar), play, frolic.
    lek|a (-te, -t), to play.
    lekplats (-en, -er), playground.
    let|a (-te or -ade, -at), to search.
    lev|a (-de, -t), to live.
    levnad (-en), life.
    levnadslust (-en), joy of living.
    lida (led, lidit, liden), to suffer pain; -- mot, or emot, approach.
    lidande (-t, -n), suffering.
    ligga (låg, legat, legad), to lie.
    lik, lika, like, just as, equally.
    likafullt, just the same.
    lik|e (no def. sing., -ar), equal.
    likn|a (-ade, -at), to resemble.
    liksom, just as, as though, as.
    likväl, anyway.
    lilj|a (-an, -or), lily.
    liljehy (-n), lily white complexion.
    liljekull|e (-en, -ar), lily mound.
    liljestäng|el (-eln, -lar), lily stem.
    liljevit, lily white.
    lilla, little, small.
    lind (-en, -ar), linden tree.
    lind|a (-ade, -at), to twine around.
    list (-en), deceit, cunning.
    lit|a (-ade, or let, -at), to depend upon.
    liten, little, small.
    liv (-et, --), life, waist.
    livstid (-en, -er), life time.
    ljud (-et, --), sound.
    ljuda (ljöd, ljudit), resound.
    ljuga (ljög, ljugit), to lie.
    ljung (-en), heather.
    ljung|a (-ade, -at), to flash.
    ljungare (-n) the thunderer.
    ljungeld (-en, -ar), flash of lightning.
    ljus, bright, light.
    ljus (-et, --), light.
    ljusalf (-en, -er), light elf.
    ljusblå, light blue.
    ljuslockig, light-haired.
    ljuv, beautiful, sweet.
    ljuvlig, sweet, delightful.
    lock (-en, -ar), lock.
    lock|a (-ade, -at), to entice, lure.
    lodrät, perpendicular.
    log, see le.
    loft (-et, --), loft.
    lossa (-ade, -at), to loosen, set free.
    lott (-en, -er), lot, fate.
    lottning (-en, -ar), casting of lot.
    lov (-et), praise.
    lov|a (-ade, -at), to promise, praise.
    lovlig, permissible.
    luden, hairy, shaggy.
    luft (-en), air.
    luftig, airy.
    lugn (-et), peace, calm, lull.
    lugn, quiet, calm.
    lull|a (-ade, -at), to hum.
    ljummig, leafy, shady.
    lumpen, mean, paltry, sordid.
    lumpor, no sing., rags.
    lund (-en, -er or -ar), grove.
    lung|a (-an, -or), lung.
    lur (-en, -ar), trumpet.
    lur|a (-ade, -at), to lurk.
    lurvhårig, shaggy.
    lust (-en), pleasure, desire.
    lustig, comical, lively, pleasurable.
    lut|a (-ade, -at), to incline, bend, lean.
    luttr|a (-ade, -at), to purify.
    lycka (-n), good fortune.
    lyck|as (-ades, -ats), to succeed.
    lycklig, fortunate, happy.
    lyda, (lydde, lytt), to obey.
    lydig, obedient.
    lyft|a (-ade, or -e, -at, or lyft), to lift.
    lykt|a (-ade, -at), to close.
    lykt|a (-an, -or), lantern, lamp.
    lysa (-te, -t), to shine.
    lysmask (-en, -ar), glowworm.
    lyssn|a (-ade, -at), to listen.
    lys|ta (-te, -t), to desire.
    låg, low.
    låg, see lägga.
    låg|a (-an, -or), flame.
    låg|a (-ade, -at), to glare, glow.
    lån|a (-ade or -te, -at or -t), to borrow, loan.
    LÅNG, long, far.
    långsam, tedious, slow.
    långskepp (-et, --), warship of the viking period.
    lås (-et, --), lock.
    låta (lät, låtit), to let, permit, sound.
    lägga (lade, lagt, lagd), to lay, put; -- i land, to land.
    lägre, lower.
    lämn|a (-ade, -at), to leave.
    lån|a (-te, -t), to borrow, loan.
    länd (-en, -er), loin, side.
    länge, long time, long.
    länger, längre, longer.
    längs (med), along, along the side of.
    längst, longest, farthest.
    längt|a (-ade, -at), to long.
    längtan, indecl., longing.
    längtansfull, longingly.
    längtersk|a (-an, -or), the longing one.
    länte, see läna.
    läpp (-en, -ar), lip.
    lär, likely, it is said.
    lär|a (-de, -t), to learn, teach.
    läx|a (-an, -or), teaching, doctrine.
    lärk|a (-an, -or), lark.
    lärospån (-en, or -et, --), first exploit, achievement.
    läs|a (-te, -t), to Read.
    lät, see låta.
    lätt, light, easy, lightly.
    lödig, of pure metal, genuine.
    löfte (-t, -n), promise.
    lög|a (-ade, -at), to wash.
    lögn (-en, -er), lie.
    löje (-t, -n), laughter, smile.
    lön (-en, -er), reward.
    lönvalv (-et, --), secret vault or chamber.
    löpning (-en, -ar), running, race, run.
    lös, loose.
    lös|a (-te, -t), to loosen, dissolve; -- en uppgift, discharge a duty.
    löslig, loose.
    löv (et, --), leaf.
    löv|as (-ades, -äts), to sprout, become green, get leaves.
    lövsal (-en, -ar), leafy bower, arbor.

    M.

    makja (-ade, -at), to move, shift.
    maka (-n, -r), mate, wife.
    mak|e (-en, -ar), husband.
    makt (-en, -er), power, might.
    malm (-en, -er), ore.
    man (-en, -ar), mane.
    man (-nen, män, or poet, manner), man.
    man, one.
    mandomsrön (-et, --), manly achievement.
    manlig, manly.
    mannaring (-en, -ar), circle of men.
    manshög, man high.
    mant|el (-eln, -lar), mantle, cloak.
    mark (-en, -er), mark (about 1/2 kilogram).
    mark (-en), ground.
    marmorbarm (-en, -ar), marble breast.
    marmorklyft (-en), solid block of marble.
    marmorsten (-en, -ar), marble.
    marmortemp|el (-let, --), marble temple.
    marvad, i --, waterlogged.
    mast (-en, -er), mast.
    mastfur|a (-an, -or), fir tree, mast tree.
    mat (-en), food.
    mat|a (-ade, -at), to feed.
    matt, weak.
    med, with, along, for, to, of.
    mellan, between.
    men, indecl., injury, bane.
    men, but.
    men|a (-ade or -te, -at or -t), to mean, intend,
    mened (-en), perjury,
    mening (-en, -ar), meaning, intention, opinion,
    mer(a), more,
    middag (-en, -ar), midday, dinner.
    midj|a (-an, -or), waist.
    midnattsdagg (-en), midnight dew.
    midnatssol (-en), midnight sun.
    midnatstid (-en), time of midnight.
    midsommar (-en, -somrar), midsummer.
    midsommarfest (-en, -er), festival of midsummer.
    midsommarsol (-en), midsummer sun.
    mig, acc. of jag, me.
    mil (-en, --), mile.
    mild, mild.
    mildhet (-en), mildness, kindness.
    min, mitt, mina, my, mine.
    mindre, less, smaller.
    min|nas (-des, -ts), to remember.
    minne (-t, -n), memory, token of remembrance.
    minst, least, smallest.
    missnöjd, dissatisfied.
    mist|a (-ade, or -te, -at or -t), to lose.
    mjöd (-et), mead.
    mjödhorn (-et, --), meadhorn.
    mjölkvit, milk white.
    mod (-et), courage, valor.
    moder (-n, mödrar), mother.
    modig, brave.
    mogen, ripe.
    mogn|a (-ade, -at), to ripen.
    moln (-et, --), cloud.
    mor, abbrev. of moder.
    mordbrand (-en), incendiarism.
    mordbrännarkung (-en, -ar), incendiary king.
    mogn|a (-ade, -at) sig, to become fully awake.
    morgon (-en, morgnar), morning.
    morgondager (-n), dawn.
    morgondagg (-en), morning dew.
    morgondröm (-men, -mar), morning dream.
    morgonglans (-en), morning light.
    morgongryning (-en), dawn.
    morgonrodnad (-en, -er), glow of dawn, aurora.
    morgonstund (-en, -er), morning hour.
    morgonvind (-en, -ar), morning wind.
    morn|a (-ade, -at) sig, to become fully awake.
    mossväxt (-en, -er), moss.
    mot, against, towards.
    mot|a (-ade, -at), to stop, keep back.
    motväg|a (-de, -t), to counterbalance.
    mulen, dark, gloomy.
    mull (-en), ground, sod.
    multen, decayed.
    mun (-nen, -nar), mouth.
    mund, see mun.
    munter, jolly, jovial, glad.
    mur (-en, -ar), wall.
    mur|a (-ade, -at), to do masonry work.
    must (-en), sap, juice, fat.
    mycket, much.
    myntad, coined.
    må (måtte), may.
    mål (-et, --), goal.
    måål|a (-ade, -at), to paint.
    målsman (-nen, -män), advocate, sponsor.
    mån (månde), perchance, might.
    månad (-en, -er), month.
    månde, see mån.
    mån|e (-en, -ar), moon.
    mången, many a one, many.
    mångfaldig, manifold.
    mångvis, erudite, very wise.
    månne, perhaps, do you think.
    månskensblick (-en, -ar), dim glances.
    månskensförst|e (-en, -ar), moonlight prince.
    mård (-en, -ar), marten.
    måste, must.
    mått (-et, --), measure.
    mäktig, mighty.
    mängd (-en), great number.
    männer, poetical for män, men.
    mänska, see människa.
    mänsklig, human.
    mänsklighet (-en), humanity.
    mänskobröst (-et,--), human heart, breast.
    människ|a (-an, -or), man, human being.
    människokraft (-en, -er), power of man.
    mänskohand (-en, -händer), human hand.
    mänskoätt (-en, -er), human family.
    mänskoöde (-et, -n), human affairs, human destiny.
    märg (-en), marrow.
    märk|a (-te, -t), to notice.
    mästare (-n, --), master.
    mö (-n, -r), maiden.
    möd|a (-an, -or), hardship, pains.
    möderne (-t), mother's side.
    mönstr|a (-ade, -at), to review, examine.
    mörd|a (-ade, -at), to kill, murder.
    mördarhand (-en, -händer), murderer's hand.
    mörk, dark.
    mörkblå, dark blue.
    mörk|er (-ret), darkness.
    mörkn|a (-ade, -at), to grow dark.
    möt|a (-te, -t), to meet.
    möte (-t, -n), meeting.

    N.

    nag|el (-em, -lar), finger nail, spike.
    naken, naked, bare.
    nalk|as (-ades, -ats), to approach.
    namn (-et, --), name.
    namnlös, nameless.
    narr (-en, -ar), fool.
    narrspel (-et, --), foolery.
    natt (-en, nätter), night.
    nattgammal, one night old.
    nattlig, nightly, dark as night.
    natur (-en), nature.
    ned, neder, ner, down.
    nedanför, below.
    neder, see ned.
    nederkall|a (-ade, -at), to call down, invoke.
    nederslagen, see nederslå.
    neder|slå (-slog, -slagit, -slagen), to strike down.
    nederst, lowest.
    nedrig, low, rascally.
    nedsteg, see nedstiga,
    ned|stiga (-steg, -stigit, -stigen), to step down, descend.
    nedåt, downwards.
    nej, no.
    nek|a (-ade, -at), to deny, refuse.
    nerifrån, from below.
    ner, see ned.
    nere, down.
    nick|a (-ade, -at), to nod.
    nidingsdåd (-et,--), villainous deed.
    niding (-en, -ar), outlaw, villain.
    nidingsfunder, no sing., malicious artifices.
    nidingsstång (-en, -stänger), niding post, pillory.
    njuta (njöt, njutit, njuten), to enjoy.
    nog, indeed, enough.
    noga, careful, carefully.
    nord (-en), the North, Scandinavia.
    nordbo (-n, -r), Northerner.
    nordisk, Northern.
    nordland (-et), the Northland, Scandinavia.
    nordman (-nen, -män), Northerner.
    nordmannakung (-en, -ar), king of the North.
    nordmannasätt (-et, --), manner of the North.
    norn|a (-an, -or), norn.
    norr, north.
    norrsken (-et, --), Northern light.
    norräna, Norse tongue.
    nu, now.
    ny, new.
    nyck (-en, -er), whim.
    nyckel (-eln, -lar), key.
    nyfälld, new-fallen.
    nyfödd, newborn.
    nyinvigd, newly dedicated.
    nyskapad, newly created.
    nyss, just now, a while ago, recently.
    nyttig, useful.
    nyvald, newly elected.
    nå (-dde, -tt), to reach.
    någon, some, some one, any, anyone.
    näktergal (-en, -ar), nightingale.
    nämn|a (-de, -t), to mention, call.
    när, when.
    nära, när, near.
    när|a (-de, -t), to nourish.
    näring (-en, -ar, pl. in sense of occupation), nourishment.
    närmast, nearest.
    näs (-et, --), point, peninsula.
    näst, next.
    nät (-et, --), net.
    nöd (-en), misery, hardship.
    nödig, necessary.
    nödvändig, necessary.
    nödvändighet (-en), necessity.
    nöjd, contented.

    O.

    o, oh, O.
    oavvänd, fixed, unceasing.
    obemärkt, unnoticed.
    obeprövad, untried.
    obeväpnad, unarmed.
    och, and.
    ock, also.
    också, also.
    odalbond|e (-en, -bonder), freehold land owner.
    odödlig, immortal.
    off|er (-ret, --), sacrifice.
    offerboll (-en, -ar), sacrificial bowl.
    offerlamp|a (-an, -or), sacrificial fire.
    offerhus (-et, --), sacrificial temple.
    offerkniv (-en, -ar), sacrificial knife.
    offerlund (-en, -ar), sacrificial grove.
    offerfrest (-en, -er), sacrificial priest.
    offersten (-en, -ar), sacrificial stone.
    offerång|a (-an, -or), sacrificial incense.
    offr|a (-ade, -at), to sacrifice.
    ofruktbar, sterile, unfruitful.
    ofta, often.
    ofärd (-en), misfortune, disaster.
    oförsonlig, unrelenting, unforgiving.
    oförsont, unpropitiated.
    ohämnad, unavenged.
    ohörd, unheard, unheeded.
    okänd, unknown.
    om, about, if, concerning, for, during, in, at.
    ombord, aboard.
    omfluten, encompassed, surrounded by water.
    omge, see omgiva.
    om|giva, omge (-gav, -givit, -given), to surround.
    omhäng|a (-ade, -at), to protect, hedge in.
    omkring, around.
    omlind|a (-ade, -at), to entwine.
    omsider, at last.
    omstrål|a (-ade, -at), to surround with light.
    omöjlig, impossible.
    ond, evil, angry, bad.
    onödig, unnecessary.
    opp, upp, up.
    ord (-et, --), word.
    orm (-en, -ar), serpent.
    ormsling|a (-an, -or), serpentine ring or figure.
    orolig, disturbed.
    ort (-en, -er), place, locality.
    oräknelig, innumerable.
    orätt, wrong.
    orätt (-en), injustice, wrong.
    osedd, unseen.
    oskadd, uninjured.
    oskapelig, unshapely.
    oskuld (-en), innocence.
    oskuldsfull, innocent.
    oss, us.
    osviklig, unfailing.
    osådd, unsown.
    outsäglig, unspeakable.
    outtydd, unexplained.
    ovan, above.
    ovan, unaccustomed, unusual.
    ovanfrån, from above.
    ovanför, above.
    ovanom, above.
    ovanuppå, above.
    oviss, uncertain.
    ovän (-nen, -ner), enemy.
    oändlig, illimitable, infinite.

    P.

    palm (-en, -er), palm.
    pann|a (-an, -or), forehead,
    pansar (-et, --), armor, sheath.
    par (-et, --), pair.
    park (-en, -er), park.
    parvis, in pairs.
    pass|a (-ade, -at), to fit, be fitting.
    pek|a (-ade, -at), to point.
    pelargång (-en, -ar), colonnade.
    pelarrad (-en, -er), row of pillars.
    pelarstam (-men, -mar), shaft of column.
    pelarstod (-en, -er), column.
    pels (-en, -ar), fur coat.
    pestsjuk, pestsmitten.
    pil (-en, -ar), arrow.
    pilregn (-et), shower of arrows.
    pilt (-en, -ar), lad.
    plank|a (-an, -or), plank.
    plant|a (-an, -or), plant.
    plats (-en, -er), place, spot.
    plock|a (-ade, -at), to pluck, gather.
    plog (-en, -ar), plow.
    plundr|a (-ade, -at), to plunder.
    port (-en, -ar), gate, portal.
    prakt (-en), splendor.
    pris (-et), price, prize, honor.
    pris|a (-ade, -at), to praise.
    propp|a (-ade, -at), to stuff.
    pryda (prydde, prytt), to adorn.
    präktig, excellent, splendid.
    präst (-en, -er), priest.
    pröv|a (-ade, -at), to test, try.
    puls (-en, -ar), pulse.
    pung (-en, -ar), pouch, purse.
    purpur (-et), purple.
    purpurbetslad, with purple bridle.
    purpurbräm (-et, --), purple border.
    purpurduk (-en), purple cloth.
    purpurglans (-en), purple glow.
    purpurhatt (-en, -ar), purple hat.
    purpurtäcke (-t, -n), purple drapery.
    på, on, upon, at, in, by.
    på|skjuta (-sköt, -skjutit), to push, press forward.
    pärl|a (-an, -or), pearl.

    R.

    rad (-en, -er), row, line.
    radvis, line by line, in lines.
    ragl|a (-ade, -at), to stagger.
    rak, straight.
    rand (-en, ränder), edge, stripe.
    rand|a (-ade, -at), to make lines, stripe, make edge or border.
    rand|as (-ades, -ats), (dagen), to dawn.
    rank|a (-an, -or), vine.
    ras|a (-ade, -at), to rage.
    rasslande, rattling.
    red, see rida.
    redan, already.
    redlig, honest.
    redo|göra (-gjorde, -gjort, -gjord), to give an account.
    regn (-et, --), rain.
    ren, pure, clean.
    ren, contr. of redan, already.
    ren|a (-ade, -at), to cleanse, purify.
    res|a (-te, -t), to rise, raise, go, travel.
    ret|a (-ade, -at), to arouse to anger, irritate.
    rev|a (-ade, -at), to reef; -- segel, take in the sail.
    rida (red, ridit), to ride.
    rig|el (-eln, -lar), bolt.
    rik, rich.
    rike (-t, -n), kingdom, dominion.
    rikedom (-en, -ar), wealth.
    ring (-en, -ar), ring.
    ringa, little, insignificant.
    ring|el (-eln, -lar), coil, ring.
    rist|a (-ade, -at), to cut, scratch.
    rit|a (-ade, -at), to write, trace.
    riva (rev, rivit, riven), to tear.
    ro (-n), peace, quiet.
    ro (-dde, -tt), to row.
    rod|er (-ret, --), rudder.
    roderstång (-en, -stänger), rudder bar.
    rodn|a (-ade, -at), to blush.
    rop|a (-ade, -at), to call, cry, shout.
    ros (-en, -or), rose.
    rosenfärg (-en, -er), rose color.
    rosenfärgad, rose-colored.
    rosengård (-en, -ar), rose garden.
    rosenkalk (-en, -ar), rose calyx.
    rosenkind (-en, -er), rosy cheek.
    rosenknopp (-en, -ar), rosebud.
    rosenläpp (-en, -ar), rosy lip.
    rosenröd, roseate, red.
    rosenving|e (-en, -ar), roseate wing.
    rosig, rosy.
    rost (-en), rust.
    rostad, rusty.
    rot (-en, rötter), root.
    rotfästad, rooted, firm.
    rov (-et, --), prey, quarry.
    rubb|a (-ade, -at), to disturb.
    rubin (-en, -er), ruby.
    rubinknapp (-en, -ar), ruby gem.
    rull|a (-ade, -at), to roll, revolve.
    rum (-met, --), room, place.
    run|a (-an, -or), rune.
    runbeskriven, inscribed with runes.
    rund, round.
    rund (-en, -er), circle.
    rund|a (-ade, -at), to surround.
    rund|el (-eln, -lar), circle.
    runeskrift (-en, -er), runic inscription.
    runetavl|a (-an, -or), runic tablet.
    runogrift (-en, -er), runic crypt.
    runohäll (-en, -ar), rune stone.
    runoflåg|a (-an, -or), rune flame.
    runstav (-en, -ar), rune staff.
    runsten (-en, -ar), rune stone.
    runtomkring, round about.
    rus (-et, --), spree, intoxication.
    rut|a (-an, -or), square, check, pane.
    ruttn|a (-ade, -at), to rot.
    ruv|a (-ade, -at), to brood.
    ryck|a (-te, -t), to tear, pull.
    rygg (-en, -ar), back.
    ryka (rök, rukit, or rykte, rykt), to smoke or steam, emit smoke.
    rykte (-t, -n), report, fame, rumor.
    rymd (-en, -er), space.
    rymlig, spacious.
    rynk|a (-ade, -at), to knit, as eyebrow or forehead.
    rys|a (-te, -t), to shudder.
    ryslig, hideous.
    ryst|a (-ade, -at), to shake.
    ryta (röt, rutit, or rytit), to roar.
    rå (-n, -r), yard (nautical term).
    rå (-dde, -tt) för, to be responsible for, -- över, govern.
    råd (-et, --), advice.
    råda, (rådde, rått), to rule, advise.
    råg (-en), rye.
    råg|a (-ade, -at), to fill to overflowing.
    rån|a (-ade, -at), to rob.
    räck|a (-te, -t), to reach, extend.
    rädas (räddes), to be afraid.
    rädd, afraid.
    rädd|a (-ade, -at), to save.
    räkn|a (-ade, -at), to count, reckon.
    rämna (-ade, -at), to split open.
    rätt, right.
    rätta, med --, justly, by right.
    rätt (-en), justice, right.
    rättvis, just.
    rättvisa (-n), justice.
    räv (-en, -ar), fox.
    röd, red.
    rök, see ryka.
    rök (-en), smoke.
    rökfång (-et, --), smoke escape, flue.
    rökmoln (-et, --), cloud of smoke.
    rön|a (-te, -t), to experience.
    rör|a (-de, -t), to move, touch.
    rörpil (-en, -ar), reed.
    röst (-en, -er), voice.
    röt, see ryta.
    röv|a (-ade, -at), to rob.
    rövare (-n, --), robber.

    S.

    sade, see säga.
    sag|a (-an, -or), saga, story.
    sagt, see säga.
    sak (-en, -er), matter, thing.
    sakn|a (-ade, -at), to miss.
    saknad (-en), regret, longing; känna --, to miss.
    sakta, slowly.
    saktmod (-et), meekness.
    sal (-en, -ar), hall, main room.
    salig, blessed.
    salighet (-en, -er), blessedness.
    salsdörr (-en, -ar), hall door.
    salt (-et), salt, adj. salt.
    saltad, salt.
    saltskum (-met), briny foam.
    sam, see simma.
    samarv (-et, --), joint inheritance.
    saml|a (-ade, -at), to gather.
    samma, the same.
    samman, together.
    sammetsmantel (-eln, -lar), velvet cloak.
    sand (-en), sand.
    sann, true.
    sanning (-en, -ar), truth.
    sans|a (-ade, -at) sig, to compose oneself.
    sansad, reasonable, sober.
    sansking (-en), sense, composure.
    satt, see sltta or sätta.
    schack (-et), chess.
    schackbord (-et, --), chess board.
    scharlakansröd, scarlet.
    se (såg, sett, sedd), to see, look.
    sed (-en, -er), custom.
    sedan, sen, since, after.
    seg|el (-let, --), sail.
    seg|er (-ern, -rar), victory.
    segl|a (-ade, -at), to sail.
    seglare (-n, --), sailor.
    segling (-en, -ar), cruise, sailing.
    segr|a (-ade, -at), to conquer.
    sen, see sedan; -- dess, since then.
    sen, late, tardy; sent omsider, at last.
    sen|a (-an, -or), sinew.
    sett, see se.
    sex, six.
    si, behold.
    sid|a (-an, -or), side.
    sig, himself, herself, itself, themselves.
    silverblank, bright as silver.
    silverbälte (-t, -n), silver belt.
    silke (-t, -n), silk.
    silv|er (-ret), silver.
    silverbild (-en, -er), silver image.
    silverfat (-et, --), silver platter.
    silverfot (-en, -fötter), silver foot.
    silverfår|a (-an, -or), silvery furrow or band.
    silverhjälm (-en, -ar), silver helmet.
    silverhår (-et, --), silvery hair.
    silverhårig, silver-haired, gray.
    silverlock (-en, -ar), silvery lock.
    silvermån|e (-en, -ar), silver moon.
    silverplåt (-en, -ar), silver plate.
    silverport (-en, -ar), silver gate.
    silverskrid|a (-an, -or), silver scabbard.
    silverskir (-et), silver gauze.
    silverskägg (-et), gray beard.
    silverstak|e (-en, -ar), silver candlestick.
    silverstol (-en, -ar), silver chair.
    silvertak (-et, --), silver roof or ceiling.
    silvervåg (-en, -or), silvery wave.
    simma (sam, summit), to swim.
    simmare (-n, --), swimmer.
    sin, sitt, sina, his, her, its, their.
    sinne (-t, -n), mind.
    sir|a (-ade, -at), to adorn, entwine.
    sist, last.
    sitta (satt, pl. sutto, suttit), to sit.
    sjunde, seventh.
    sjunga (sjöng, sjungit, sjungen), to sing.
    sjunka (sjönk, sjunkit" sjunken), to sink.
    själ (-en, -ar), soul.
    själv, self.
    sjö (-n, -ar), lake.
    sjöblå, water blue.
    sjögrön, sea-green.
    sjöhäst (-en, -ar), sea horse.
    sjökonung (-en, -ar), sea king.
    sjöng, see sjunga.
    sjönk, se sjunka.
    skad|a (-ade, -at), to hurt.
    skad|a (-an, -or), injury, harm, waste, misfortune.
    skaft (-et, --), handle.
    skak|a (-ade, -at), to shake.
    skal (-et, --), shell,
    skal|a (-ade, -at), to scale.
    skald (-en, -er), poet.
    skalk (-en, -ar), rogue.
    skall, see skola.
    skallra (-ade, -at), to rattle.
    skall|a (-ade, -at), to resound.
    skall|e (-en, -ar), skull.
    skap|a (-ade, -at), to create.
    skapelse (-n, -r), creation.
    skar, see skära.
    skar|a (-an, -or), flock, crowd.
    skarp, sharp, keen.
    skatt (-en, -er), tax, treasure.
    skatt|a (-ade, -at), to value, treasure.
    skattskyldig, liable to taxation.
    ske (-dde, -tt), to happen.
    sken (-et, --), light.
    sken, see skina.
    skepnad (-en, -er), form.
    skepp (-et, --), ship.
    skeppsbord (-et, --), deck.
    skeppsdäck (-et, --), deck.
    skeppsvrak (-et, --), wreck.
    skick|a (-ade, -at), to send.
    skidgård (-en, -ar), paling, palisade.
    skift|a (-ade, -at), to exchange, apportion, change, shift.
    skifte (-t, -n), vicissitude.
    skiltvakt (-en, -er), sentry.
    skil|ja (-de, -t), to divide, separate, part, distinguish.
    skim|mer (-ret), shimmer, gleam.
    skimr|a (-ade, -at), to shimmer.
    skina (sken, skinit), to shine.
    skinn (-et, --), hide, fur, skin.
    skip|a (-ade, -at) lag, to administer law.
    skir (-et), gauze.
    skiv|a (-an, -or), plate, disk.
    skjuta (sköt, skjutit, skjuten), to shoot, push.
    sko (-dde, -tt), to shoe.
    skog (-en, -ar), forest.
    skola (skall, skulle, skolat), shall, will, must.
    skon|a (-ade, -at), to spare.
    skoning (-en), mercy, exemption.
    skot (-et), sheet, sail.
    skraml|a (-ade, -at), to rattle.
    skrap|a (-ade, -at), to scrape, paw.
    skred, see skrida,
    skrek, see skrika.
    skrev, see skriva.
    skri (-et, -- ), shriek.
    skrida (skred, skridit, skriden), to glide, proceed, walk slowly.
    skrika (skrek, skrikit), to cry.
    skriva, (skrev, skrivit, skriven), to write.
    skrud (-en, -ar), attire.
    skräck (-en), terror.
    skräm|ma (-de, -t), to frighten.
    skugg|a (-an, -or), shadow.
    skuggig, shady.
    skuld (-en, -er), debt, blame, fault.
    skulderblad (-et), shoulder-blade.
    skuldlös, guiltless, innocent.
    skuldr|a (-an, -or), shoulder.
    skull, sake, fault; för någons --, on account of, for the sake
      of some one.
    skulle, see skola.
    skum (-met), foam.
    skum, dark.
    skumma (-ade, -at), to foam.
    skur|a (-ade, -at), to scrub, wash, polish.
    skurit, see skära.
    skuro, see skära.
    skvallrja (-ade, -at), to tattle, gossip.
    sky (-n, -ar), sky, cloud.
    skydd (-et), protection.
    skydd|a (-ade, -at), to protect.
    skygd, indecl., protection.
    skymf (-en, -er), insult.
    skymf|a (-ade, -at), to insult.
    skymt|a (-ade, -at), to appear by a glimpse, catch a glimpse of.
    skynd|a (-ade, -at), to hurry.
    skåd|a (-ade, -at), to see, be-hold.
    skål (-en, -ar), cup, toast, health.
    skåp (-et, --), cupboard.
    skägg (-et, --), beard.
    skäl (-et, --), reason.
    skälv|a (-de or skalv, skälvt), to tremble.
    skämt|a (-ade, -at), to jest.
    skänk (-en, -er), gift.
    skänk|a (-te, -t), to donate, give.
    skär (-et, --), rock, skerry.
    skära (skar, pl. skuro, skurit, skuren), to cut.
    skärad, cleansed, shriven.
    sköld (-en, -ar), shield.
    sköldborg (-en, -ar), circle of shields.
    sköldburen, borne or lifted on a shield.
    sköldegny (-et), din of shields.
    sköldeklang (-en), clang of shields.
    sköldmö (-n, -r), shield maiden, valkyr.
    sköldrand (-en, -ränder), edge of a shield.
    skön, beautiful.
    skönj|a (-de, -t), to discern.
    skörd (-en, -ar), harvest.
    sköt, see skjuta.
    sköte (-t), lap, bosom.
    slag (-et, --), stroke, battle.
    slagsmål (-et, --), fight.
    slagsvärd (-et, --), sword.
    slaktning (-en, -ar), battle, slaughter.
    slapp, slack, lax.
    slav (-en, -ar), slave.
    slet, see slita.
    slita (slet, slitit, sliten), to tear, wear.
    slockn|a (-ade, -at), to become extinct.
    slag, see slå.
    slumr|a (-ade, -at), to slumber.
    slung|a (-ade, -at), to hurl.
    slup (-en, -ar), boat, sloop.
    slut (-et), end; till --, at last.
    sluta (slöt, slutit, sluten), to cease, press, close, attack.
    slutligen, finally.
    sluttande, sloping.
    slå (slog, slagit, slagen), to strike; -- ned, alight,
    cast down, -- an en sång, strike up a song.
    slåss (slogs, slagits), to fight.
    släck|a (-te, -t), to extinguish.
    släd|e (-en, -ar), sleigh, sled.
    slädtravare (-n, --), sleigh-trotter
    släkt (-en, -er), generation, kinsfolk.
    slang|a (-de, -t), to throw.
    släpp|a (-te, -t), to relinquish, release; -- ut, to let out.
    slätt (-en, -er), plain, level place.
    slöj|a (-an, -or), veil.
    slös|a (-ade, -at), to squander.
    smak|a (-ade, -t), to taste.
    smal, slender, narrow.
    smalt, see smälta.
    smattr|a (-ade, -at), to beat, crackle, blare.
    smida (smidde, smitt), to forge.
    smidig, lithe.
    smultron (-et, --), strawberry.
    smyck|a (-ade, -at), to adorn.
    smycke (-t, -n), ornament.
    smyga (smög, smugit), to go stealthily, steal.
    små (pl. of liten), small, little.
    små|le (-log, -lett), to smile.
    smål|ta (-te, or smalt, smultit or smält), to melt.
    smärt, slender.
    smädlig, derisive.
    smärt|a (-an, -or), pain, suffering.
    smög, see smyga.
    snar, soon, near, quick.
    snäck|a (-an, -or), shell, ship.
    snäll, good, quick.
    snö (-n), snow.
    snöberg (-et, --), snow-capped mountain.
    snöbetäckt, snow-covered.
    snöblomm|a (-an, -or), snow drop, snow white flower.
    snög|a (-ade, -at), to snow.
    snöig, snowy.
    snöre (-t, -n), string, cord.
    snövit, snow white.
    sol (-en, -ar), sun.
    solblank, bright as the sun.
    solbrun, sunburnt.
    solhus (-et, --), sun house, conservatory.
    solsken (-et), sunshine.
    som, who, which, that, whom.
    som, as, like.
    sommar (-en, somrar), summer.
    sommarnatt (-en, --natter), summer night.
    sommarsol (-en), summer sun.
    sommartorr, sundried, withered.
    sommarvind (-en, -ar), summer wind.
    somn|a (-ade, -at), to go to sleep.
    son (-en, söner), son.
    sona, see försona.
    sorg (-en, -er), sorrow, care, responsibility.
    sorgfri, carefree.
    sorglig, sad, sorrowful.
    sorglös, carefree.
    sorgsen, sad.
    sorl (-et), hum, commotion.
    sorl|a (-ade, -at), to murmur.
    sotad, sooty.
    sova (sov, sovit), to sleep.
    spak, meek, tractable.
    spar|a (-ade, -at), to save, spare.
    sparr|e (-en, -ar), rafter.
    speg|el (-eln, -lar), mirror.
    spegelklar, clear as a mirror.
    spegelvåg (-en, -or), clear, calm water.
    spegl|a (-ade, -at), to reflect, view in mirror.
    spel (-et, --), play.
    spel|a (-te or -ade, -t or -at), to play.
    spets (-en, -ar), point, tip.
    spill|a (-de, -t), to spill, waste
    spillo, giva till --, to abandon.
    spilt|a (-an, -or), stall.
    spinna (spann, pl. spunno, spunnit, spunnen), to spin.
    spis|el (-eln, -lar), fireplace.
    spjut (-et, --), spear.
    spol|a (-ade, -at), to flush, wash away.
    spolad, spun.
    spord, see spörja.
    sporr|a (-ade, -at), to spur on.
    sprang, see springa.
    sprak|a (-ade, -at), to crackle.
    spratt (-et, --), trick.
    sprida (spred or spridde, spridit), to spread, scatter.
    springa (sprang, pl. sprungo, sprungit), to run, spring,
    break.
    spring|a (-an, -or), crack, narrow opening.
    springare (-n, --), courser.
    sprungo, see springa.
    språk (-et, --), language.
    språk|a (-ade, -at), to converse, talk.
    språng (-et, --), leap.
    spräcklig, mottled, speckled.
    spåman (-nen, -män), sooth-sayer.
    späck|a (-ade, -at), to fill, Interlard.
    späd, tender, infantile.
    spok|a (-ade,-at), to haunt.
    spän|na (-de, -t), to stretch out, bend, draw, buckle, -- hop, clinch.
    spörja (sporde, sport, spord), to inquire, learn, hear, ask.
    stack, see sticka.
    stad (-en, städer), city.
    stadig, steady, constant.
    stal, see stjäla.
    stam (-men, -mar), stem, post, trunk, framework.
    stamfar, see stamfader.
    stamfader (-n, -fäder), progenitor.
    stamm|a (-ade, -at) från, to descend from.
    stamp|a (-ade, -at), to stamp.
    stann|a (-ade, -at), to stop, remain.
    stark, strong.
    stav (-en, -ar), staff.
    steg, see stiga.
    steg (-et, --), step.
    sten (-en, -ar), stone.
    stenek (-en, -ar), holly oak.
    sticka (stack, pl. stucko, stuckit), to stick, reach forth,
      -- i brand, put on fire.
    stick|a (-ade, -at), to knit.
    stickbloss (-et, --), wood torch.
    stift|a (-ade, -at), to found, establish.
    stig (-en, -ar), path.
    stiga (steg, stigit), to step, -- upp, to arise, -- av, to dismount.
    stiltje (-n), calm.
    stilla, still.
    stinga (stäng, pl. stungo, stungit, stungen), to pierce, sting.
    stjälk (-en, -ar), stem,
    stjäla (stal, pl. stulo, stulit, stulen), to steal.
    stjarn|a (-an, -or), star.
    stjärnekrans (-en, -ar), starry wreath.
    stjärnenatt (-en, --, -nätter), starry night.
    stjärnetlfilt (-et, --), starry tent.
    stjarnevim|mel (-let), starry throng.
    stjärnklar, starlight,
    stjärnskott (-et, --), shooting star.
    stjärt (-en, -ar), tail.
    stod, see stå.
    stoft, (-et), dust, earth.
    stol (-en, -ar), chair, seat.
    stolt, proud.
    stolthet (-en), pride.
    stor, great, large.
    storm (-en, -ar), storm.
    storm|a (-ade, -at), to storm.
    stormig, stormy.
    stormörn (-en, -ar), storm eagle.
    strand (-en, stränder), shore.
    strandlös, without a shore, endless.
    strax, immediately,
    strid (-en, -er), battle, strife, conflict.
    strid, swift, rapid,
    strida,(stred, stridit), to fight.
    stridsbror, stridsbroder, comrade in arms.
    strimm|a (-an, -or), line, streak.
    stryka (strök, strukit, struken), strike, give up, roam.
    strådöd (-en), natural death.
    strål|a (-ade, -at), to beam, shine.
    strålbägare (-n, --), sparkling bowl.
    strål|e (-en, -ar), ray.
    sträck|a (-te, -t), to stretch, extend.
    sträckning (-en, -ar), stretching, extent.
    sträng (-en, -ar), string, chord.
    sträng, severe.
    strö (strödde, strött), to strew, scatter.
    ström (-men, -mar), stream.
    strömm|a (-ade, -at), to flow, stream.
    strömoln (-et, --), small, scattered clouds.
    stulen, see stjäla.
    stum, dumb, silent.
    stund (-en, -er), moment.
    stund|a (-ade, -at), to be impending, about to happen.
    stundom, occasionally.
    stungo, see stinga.
    stup|a (-ade, or stöp, -at), to fall (in battle).
    stycke (-t, -n), piece.
    styr|a (-de,-t), to steer, direct.
    styre (-t, -n), helm.
    styrbord, starboard.
    styrka (-n), strength.
    styrman (-nen, -män), pilot.
    styv, stiff.
    stå (stod, stått), stånd; -- åter, to remain.
    stål (-et), steel.
    stålblank, bright as steel, burnished.
    stålblå, steel blue.
    stålbåg|e (-en, -ar), steel bow
    stålbägare, (-n, --), steel goblet.
    stålhandsk|e (-en, -ar), gauntlet.
    stålgjuten, of wrought steel.
    stålhjälm (-en, -ar), steel helmet.
    stålbeklädd, steel clad, mailed.
    stålrand (-en, -ränder), band or edge of steel.
    stålsko (-n, -r), skate.
    stålskodd, steel shod,
    stång (-en, stänger), pole, pike.
    stång|a (-ade, -at), to butt, gore.
    ställ|a (-de, -t), to place, put.
    ställe (-t, -n) place.
    stäm|ma (-de, -t), to summon; -- möte, to set a meeting,
      make an appointment.
    stämm|a(-an, -or), voice,
    ständig, constant.
    stäng|a (-de, -t), to shut.
    stäng|el (-eln, -lar), stalk.
    stäv (-en, -ar), stem.
    stäv|a (-an, -or), pail.
    stödja (stödde, stött, stödd), to support, lean.
    stöp, see stupa.
    större, greater, large.
    störst, greatest, largest.
    stört|a (-ade, -at) fram, rush forward.
    stöt (-en, -ar), blow.
    stöt|a (-te, -t), to strike, encounter.
    suck (-en, -ar), sigh.
    suck|a (-ade, -at), to sigh.
    sund (-et, --), sound.
    sunnanskog (-en, -ar), southern forest.
    sus (-et), murmur, rustle, sough.
    sus|a (-ade, -at), to murmur, rustle, whizz.
    sutto, see sitta.
    svag, weak.
    sval, cool.
    svalg (-et, --), mouth, jaw.
    svall, (-et), swell, surge.
    svall|a (-ade, -at), to swell.
    svallvåg (-en), surge, roller.
    svandunsbarm (-en, -ar), bosom as soft as swan's down.
    svar (-et, --), answer.
    svar|a (-ade, -at), to answer.
    svart, black.
    svartklädd, dressed in black.
    svartekung (-en), black art king.
    svartskäggig, having black beard, swarthy.
    svarv|a (-ade, -at), to lathe, turn.
    sveda (svedde, svett), to singe, burn.
    svedjeland (-et, --), fire swept land, burnt clearing.
    svek (-et, --), deceit.
    sven (-nen, -ner), youth, page, comrade.
    svett (-en), perspiration.
    svika (svek, svikit, sviken), to fail, betray.
    svikt|a (-ade, -at), to give way under weight.
    svindl|a (-ade, -at), to grow dizzy.
    sving|a (-ade, -at), to swing, fly.
    svurit, see svärja.
    svår, hard, difficult.
    sväng|a (-de, -t), to swing.
    svära (svor, pl. svuro, svurit), to swear, take oath.
    svärdlös, swordless, disarmed.
    svärdshugg (-et, --), blow or strike of the sword.
    svärja (svor, pl. svuro, svurit, svuren), to swear, make solemn promise,
      or take oath.
    svärm|a (-ade, -at), to swarm, roam, dream.
    svärmare (-n, --), dreamer, visionary.
    sväv|a (-ade, -at), to hover, rove.
    syn (-en, -er), sight, vision.
    syn|a (-ade, -at), to examine, spy.
    syn|as (-tes, -ts), to seem, appear.
    syskonstjärn|a (-an, -or), sister star.
    syssl|a (-ade, -at), to be busy.
    syst|er (-ern, -rar), sister.
    så (-dde, -tt), to sow.
    så, thus, so.
    såg, see se.
    såll|a (-ade, -at), to sift.
    sång (-en, -er), song.
    sångare (-n, --), singer.
    sångarskara (-an, -or), group of singers.
    sångfåg|el (-eln, -lar), songbird.
    sär (-et, --), wound.
    sår|a (-ade, -at), to wound.
    säd (-en), seed.
    säga (sade, sagt), to say, tell, relate.
    säg|en (-nen, -ner), saying, legend.
    säker, sure, secure.
    sälja (sålde, sålt, såld), to sell.
    säll, happy, blessed.
    säll|e (-en, -ar), fellow, vulgar fellow.
    sällhet (-en), bliss.
    sällsam, singular.
    sän|da (-de, -t), to send.
    sändebud (-et, --), messenger.
    sänder, i --, at a time.
    sändman (-nen, --män), messenger.
    säng (-en, -ar), bed.
    sänk|a (-te, -t), to lower, sink.
    särskild, special, separate.
    säte (-t, -n), seat.
    sätta (satte, satt), to put, locate, fix; -- sig, to sit down,
      locate; -- ut, set out; -- åstad, start, sally forth.
    säv (-en), rushes.
    söder (-n), South.
    sök|a (-te, -t), to seek.
    sömn|a (-ade, -at), to sew, embroider.
    sömn (-en), sleep.
    sömnig, sleepy, drowsy.
    sömnlös, sleepless.
    sörj|a (-de, -t), to grieve.
    sov|a (-de, -t), to put to sleep.

    T.

    ta, abbrev. of taga.
    tack (-en), thanks.
    tack|a (-ade, -at), to thank.
    tad|el (-let), blame, reproach, blemish.
    tafs (-en, -ar), tassel.
    tag (-et, --), hold, grip.
    taga, ta (tog, tagit, tagen), to take.
    tak (-et, --), roof, ceiling.
    tal (-et, --), speech, number.
    tal|a (-ade, or -te, -at, or -t), to speak.
    tank|e (-en, -ar), thought.
    tanklös, thoughtless.
    tapper, brave.
    tapp|a (-ade, -at), to lose.
    teck|en (-net, --), sign, omen.
    teckn|a (-ade, -at), to trace, write, make signs.
    teg, see tiga.
    temp|el (-let, --), temple.
    tempelbrand (-en), burning of the temple.
    tempeljungfru (-n, -r), temple maiden.
    tempellund (-en, -ar), temple grove.
    tempelrund (-en, -er), temple circle.
    tempelrök (-en), smoke from the burning temple.
    tempelskändare (-n, --), one who profanes the temple.
    tempelsläkte (-t, -n), temple tribe.
    tempeltilj|a (-an, -or), temple floor.
    tempelvalv (-et, --), temple arch, dome.
    tempelvägg (-en, -ar), temple wall.
    tid (-en, -er), time.
    tidning (-en, -ar), news.
    tiga (teg, tegat), to keep silent.
    tigg|a (-de, -t), to beg.
    tiggarstav (-en, -ar), beggar's staff.
    tllj|a (-an, -or), floor.
    till, to, as, for.
    tillbaka, back, in return.
    till|bedja (-bad, -bedit, -bedd), to worship.
    tillhopa, together.
    tillhor|a (-de, -t), to belong to.
    tillika, also.
    till|komma (-kom, -kommit), to come into existence, to befit,
      be proper, incumbent upon.
    tills, until.
    tillsamman, together.
    til|lägga (-lade, -lagt), to add.
    timme (-en, -ar), hour.
    timr|a (-ade, -at), to build.
    ting (-et, --), thing, court of justice.
    tinga, see betinga.
    tinn|e (-en, -ar), pinnacle.
    tinning (-en, -ar), temple.
    tio, ten.
    titt|a (-ade, -at), to keep, look.
    tjus|a (-ade, -at), to fascinate.
    tjuv (-en, -ar), thief.
    tjäll (-et, --), hut, home.
    tofs (-en, -ar), tassel.
    tog, see taga.
    tolv, twelve.
    tolvmannakraft, strength of twelve men.
    tolvt (-en, -er), dozen.
    tom, empty.
    tomhänt, indecl., empty handed.
    tomt (-en, -er), plot, lot.
    ton (-en, -er), tone, sound.
    topp (-en, -ar), top.
    torn (-et, --), tower.
    torr, dry.
    torv (-en), sod, turf.
    torv|a (-an, -or), turf, sod.
    tre, three.
    travare (-n, --), trotter.
    trenne, three.
    trevlig, pleasant.
    trettio, thirty.
    triv|as (-des, -ts), to thrive, feel at home.
    tro (-dde, -tt), to believe, think.
    tro (-n), faith, belief, trust.
    trofast, faithful, steadfast.
    trogen, faithful.
    trohet (-en), faithfulness.
    troll (-et, --), goblin, monster.
    trolldom (-en), witchcraft.
    trollpar (-et, --), pair of monsters.
    trollsäng (-en, -er), incantation.
    trolös, faithless.
    tron (-en, -er), throne.
    trots (-et), defiance; in spite of.
    trots|a (-ade, -at), to defy.
    trotsig, defiant.
    tryck|a (-te, -t), to press.
    tryckning (-en, -ar), pressure.
    trygg, secure.
    träbeläte (-t, -n), wooden image.
    träd (-et, --), tree.
    träda (trädde, trätt), to step, walk, proceed.
    träff|a (-ade, -at), to meet with, hit, strike.
    träl (-en, -ar), serf, slave.
    trängla (-de, -t), to press.
    trög, dull.
    trösk|el (-eln, -lar), threshold.
    tröst (-en), consolation.
    trött, weary.
    tröttad, tired.
    tröttnia (-ade, -at), to grow tired.
    tröttsam, tiresome.
    tu, two.
    tugg|a (-ade, -at), to chew.
    tull (-en, -ar), toll.
    tuml|a (-ade, -at), to tumble, roll.
    tummje (-en, -ar), thumb.
    tung, heavy.
    tung|a (-an, -or), tongue.
    turturduv|a (-an, -or), turtledove.
    tusen, thousand.
    tusental (-et, --), a thousand.
    tuv|a (-an, -or), knoll.
    tvekan, indecl., hesitation.
    tvemännings, two together.
    tvenne, two.
    tvinga (tvang, pi. tvungo, tvungit, tvungen), to compel, subdue.
    tvinn|a (-ade, -at), to twine.
    tvist (-en, -er), quarrel.
    tvist|a (-ade, -at), to dispute.
    två, two.
    tvång (-et), compulsion.
    tvänne, two.
    ty, because, for.
    tyck|a (-te,-t), to think, mean.
    tyst|a (-ade, -at), to silence.
    tyck|as (-tes, -ts), to appear, seem.
    tyst, silent, quiet.
    tystn|a (-ade, -at), to become silent.
    tystnad (-en), silence.
    tyvärr, alas.
    tå, (-n, -r), toe.
    tåg (-et), march, campaign.
    tåg|a (-ade, -at), to march.
    tål|a (-de, -t), to endure.
    tålig, patient.
    tår (-en, -ar), tear.
    tårlös, tearless.
    täck|e (-et, -en) covering.
    tälj|a (-de, -t), to enumerate, relate, count.
    tält (-et, --), tent.
    tält|a (-ade, -at), tö put up tents, encamp.
    tämja (tämde or tamde, tamt or tamt, tamd), to tame.
    tänlda (-de, -t), to kindle, light.
    tänk|a (-te, -t), to think.
    tär|a (-de, -t), to consume,
    tärn|a (-an, -or), lass, maiden.
    tärning (-en, -ar), die, dice,
    tät, close.
    tävl|a (-ade, -at), to contest, vie, compete.
    töckenbud (-et, --), gloomy messenger.
    töcknig, misty.
    töm|ma (-de, -t), to empty, drain.
    töra (torde), perchance, no douht, may.
    töras (tordes, torts), to dare.
    törst (-en), thirst.
    törst|a (-ade, -at), to thirst.

    U.

    ull (-en), wool.
    ulv (-en, -ar) wolf.
    undan, away.
    under, under, beneath, during.
    und|er (-ret, --), wonder.
    underbar, wonderful.
    underlig, wonderful.
    undr|a (-ade, -at), to wonder.
    ung, young.
    ungdom (-en), youth.
    ungdomsblod (-et), youthful blood.
    ungdomsvän (-nen, -ner), friend from childhood.
    ung|e (-en, -ar), young one.
    ungersven (-nen, -ner), young man, swain.
    ungträd (-et, --), young tree.
    unn|a (-ade, -at), to allow, permit without grudging.
    upp, up.
    upp|föda (-födde, -fött), to bring up.
    upp|bara (-bar, -burit, -buren), to support.
    upp|lösa (-te, -t), to dissolve.
    uppsparka, to kick up.
    uppsteg, see uppstiga. -
    upp|stiga (-steg, -stigit, -stigen), to ascend, rise.
    uppstå (-stod, -stått, -stånden), to arise.
    uppå, upon, on.
    ur (-oxe) (-en, -ar), musk ox.
    ur, from, out of.
    urn|a (-an, -or), urn.
    usel, mean, sordid, wretched.
    ut, ute, out.
    utan, without.
    utanför, outside.
    utav, of, among.
    ute|bliva (-blev, -blivit, -bliven), to fail to appear, remain away.
    uti, in.
    utlys|a (-te, -t), to announce, appoint.
    utsäde (-t), seed for planting.
    utav, out of.
    utöver, over, above, beyond.
    uppbära (-bar, pi. buro, -burit, buren), to support.

    V.

    vad, what, whatsoever.
    vad'a (-ade, -at), to wade.
    vagg|a (-ade, -at), to rock, wave.
    vagg|a (-an, -or), cradle.
    vaggsång (-en, -er), cradle song.
    vaj|a (-ade, -at), to wave.
    vak (-en, -ar), opening in the ice.
    vak|a (-ade, -at), to watch, keep awake.
    vak|a (-an, -or), thrush.
    vaken, awake.
    vakn|a (-ade, -at), to awaken.
    vakt (-en, -er), guard.
    vakt|a (-ade, -at), to watch, guard.
    vakt|el (-eln, -lar), quail.
    val (-en, -ar), whale.
    val (-et, --), choice, election.
    val|a (-an, -or), seeress.
    valhallaarving (-en, -ar), heir of Valhalla.
    valhallabarn (-et, --), child of Valhalla.
    valhallason (-en, --söner), son of Valhalla,
    valhallastol (-en), seat of Valhalla.
    valkyri|a (-an, -or), valkyr.
    vallhö (-et), meadow hay.
    valplats (-en, -er), battlefield.
    valv (-et, --), arch.
    valvdörr (-en, -ar), arch door.
    van, accustomed.
    van|a (-an, -or), habit.
    vandr|a (-ade, -at), to walk, wander.
    vandrare (-n, -- ), wanderer, walker.
    vankelmod (-et), fickleness, inconstancy.
    vantro (-n), superstition.
    vantrofylld, full of superstition.
    vap|en (-net, --), weapon.
    vapenbrak (-et), din of arms.
    vapenbroder (-n, -bröder), comrade in arms.
    vapenklang (-en), clash of arms.
    var, see vara.
    var, each, every, wherever, where.
    vara (är, var pl. voro, varit), to be.
    vara, tag dig till --, beware, look out.
    varann, varannan, each other, every other.
    varda (vart, vorden), begin to be, become.
    varenda, every.
    varför, why.
    varg i veum, outlaw, profaner of the temple.
    varhelst, wherever.
    varifrån, whence.
    varje, every.
    varligen, carefully.
    varm, warm.
    varmed, whereby.
    varn|a (-ade, -at), to warn.
    varning (-en, -ar), warning.
    vars, whose.
    varsam, cautious.
    varthelst, whithersoever.
    varöver, over or across which.
    vass, sharp.
    vatt|en (-net, --), water.
    vattendrag (-et, --), water course, stream.
    vattenfåg|el (-eln, -lar), waterfowl.
    vattenlilj|a (-an, -or), water lily.
    vattn|a (-ade, -at), to moisten,
    vaulunderverk (-et, --), product of Vaulund.
    ve, woe.
    ved (-en), wood, fuel.
    vedergäll|a (-de, -t), to repay, make retribution.
    vek, weak.
    veklig, weakly.
    vem, who.
    vemhelst, whosoever.
    vemodsfull, melancholy.
    verk (-et, --), work, deed.
    veta (visste, vetat), to know.
    vett (-et), sense.
    vi, we.
    vi, why, wherefore.
    vid, by, in, on, at.
    vidunderlig, strange, weird.
    vift|a (-ade, -at), to flap, wave, beckon.
    vig|a (-de, -t), to consecrate, wed.
    vigd, consecrated.
    vik (-en, -ar), bay.
    vika (vek, vikit, viken), to yield, turn aside.
    viking (-en, -ar), viking.
    vikingabalk (-en, -ar), viking code.
    vikingafärd (-en, -ar), viking expedition.
    vikingaliv (-et, --), viking life.
    vikingahämnd (-en), viking revenge.
    vikingaskepp (-et, --), viking ship.
    vikingavinst (-en, -er), viking profit.
    vikingavis, in viking fashion.
    vikt (-en, -er), weight.
    vil|a (-ade, -at), to rest.
    vild, wild.
    vilddjur (-et, --), wild animal.
    vilja (pr. vill, ville, velat), will, want to.
    vilj|a (-an, -or), will.
    vildsint, ferocious.
    vilken, who, which.
    vill, see vilja.
    villig, willing.
    viml|a (-ade, -at), to throng, abound.
    vin (-et), wine.
    vina (ven, vinit), to whistle, shriek.
    vinbägare (-n), wine goblet.
    vind (-en, -ar), wind.
    vindkall, producing wintry storms.
    vingad, winged.
    ving|e (-en, -ar), wing.
    vink|a (-ade, -at), to beckon.
    vinna (vann, pl. vunno, vunnit, vunnen), to win, acquire.
    vinpokal (-en, -ar), wine goblet.
    vinst (-en, -er), profit, gain.
    vint|er (-ern, -rar), winter.
    vintergrön, evergreen.
    vinterhim|mel, (-len or himmeln, -lar), wintry sky.
    vinterkväll (-en, -ar), winter evening.
    vinterköld (-en), winter cold.
    vir|a (-ade, -at), to wind, twine.
    virk|a (-ade, -at), to crochet.
    virvelvind (-en, -ar), whirlwind.
    virvl|a (-ade, -at), to whirl.
    vis (-et, --), manner.
    vis, wise.
    vis|a (-an, -or), ditty, song.
    vis|a (-ade, -at), to show, direct.
    visdomsrun|a (-an, -or), rune of wisdom, sage legend.
    vishet (-en), wisdom.
    visk|a (-ade, -at), to whisper.
    viskning (-en, -ar), whispering.
    viss, certain.
    vissn|a (-ade, -at), to wither.
    vist|as (-ades, -ats), to sojourn, remain, stay.
    visthus (-et, --), larder.
    vit, white.
    vitaktig, whitish.
    vitgrå, light gray, white and gray.
    vitklädd, dressed in white.
    vitskummig, white-capped, foaming.
    vitt, så --, as far as.
    vitter, lettered, cultured, learned.
    vitullig, woolly.
    vittberömd, far-famed.
    vorden, see varda.
    voro, see vara,
    vred, angry.
    vrede (-n), anger.
    vredesmod (-et), anger.
    vredgad, angry.
    vredg|as (-ades, -ats), to be or become angry.
    vrå (-n, -r), nook, corner of a room.
    vrål|a (-ade, -at), to howl.
    vräk|a (-te, -t), to hurl, heave.
    vuxen, see växa.
    vådlig, risky, dangerous.
    våg (-en, -or), wave.
    våg (-en, -ar), scale.
    våg|a (-ade, -at), to dare, venture.
    vågskål (-en, -ar), scale.
    våld (-et), force, tyranny.
    vår (-en, -ar), spring.
    vår, our.
    vård (-en, -ar), monument.
    vård (-en), care.
    vård|a (-ade, -at), to take care of.
    vårdag (-en, -ar), spring day.
    vårdkas (-en, -ar), signal fire
    våris (-en), spring ice.
    vårsol (-en), spring sun.
    vårsky (-n, -ar), spring cloud.
    våt, wet.
    väck|a (-te, -t), to awaken.
    väd|er (-ret), weather.
    vädj|a (-ade, -at), to appeal.
    väg (-en, -ar), road, path, way.
    väg|a (-de, -t), to weigh.
    vägg (-en, -ar), wall.
    vägra (-de, -t), to refuse.
    väl, well, indeed.
    välan, well then.
    välbekant, well-known.
    väld, indecl., partiality.
    välde (-t), power, authority.
    väldig, mighty.
    välfägnad (-en), good cheer.
    välja (valde, valt, vald), to choose.
    välkommen, welcome.
    välkomstgåv|a (-an, -or), gift of welcome.
    välkänd, well-known.
    väll|a (-de, -t), to gush.
    välment, well-meant.
    välsign|a (-ade, -at), to bless.
    välsk, Gaelic.
    vält|a (-te, -t), to roll, overturn.
    välv|a (-de, -t), to arch.
    vän (-nen, -ner), friend.
    vän|da (-de, -t), to turn.
    vänlig, friendly.
    vänskap (-en), friendship.
    vänster, left.
    vänt|a (-ade, -at), to wait, expect.
    vänsäll, sociable, amiable.
    väntan, indecl., waiting.
    väpn|a (-ade, -at), to arm.
    värd (en, -ar), host.
    värd, worth.
    värde (-t), worth.
    värdig, worthy.
    värld (-en, -ar), earth, world.
    världsbålslåg|a (-an, -or), flame of the universal pyre.
    världshav (-et, -- ), main ocean.
    världshavsbölj|a (-an, -or), wave of the ocean main.
    världskung (-en), world king.
    världsmoder (-n), mother of the world.
    värn (-et, -- ), defense.
    värnlös, defenseless.
    värst, worst.
    väs|a (-te, -t), to hiss.
    väsen, indecl., being, noise, commotion.
    västanvind (-en, -ar), west wind.
    väster (-n), west.
    västerhav (-et, -- ), Western Sea, North Sea.
    västersal (-en, -ar), western hall.
    västersalt (-et), western salt, North Sea.
    västervåg (-en, -or), western billow or sea.
    väv (-en, -ar), web, textile fabric.
    väv|a (-de, -t), to weave.
    väx|a (-te, -t or vuxit), to grow.
    växl|a (-ade, -at), to change, alternate.
    växt (-en, -er), growth, stature, plant.
    vörd|a (-ade, -at), to respect.
    vördnad (-en), respect.

    Y.

    yng|el (-let, -- ), brood.
    yngling (-en, -ar), young man, youth.
    ypp|a (-ade, -at), to reveal, lay bare.
    ypperst, foremost.
    yppig, luxurious.
    yr|a (-de, -t), to be delirious, rave, whirl.
    yttre, outer.
    yv|as (-des, -ts), to glory in, boast.

    Å.

    å, on.
    å (-n, -ar), stream.
    åbo (-n, -r), inhabitant, denizen.
    åd|er (-ern, -ror), vein.
    ålderdom (-en), old age.
    ånger (-n), contrition.
    ångest (-en), anxiety, fear.
    år (-et, --), year.
    år|a (-an, -or), oar.
    årsbarn (-et, --), born the same year, coeval.
    årsväxt (-en), harvest, crop.
    ås (-en, -ar), ridge.
    åsk|a (-an, -or), thunder.
    åskdiger, thunder laden.
    åskmoln (-et, --), thundercloud.
    åstad, away, forth.
    åter, again.
    åt, to, in, toward.
    åter|flyga (-flög, -flugit, -flugen), to fly back.
    åter|födas (-föddes, -fötts), to be born again.
    återkomst (-en), return.
    återliv|a (-ade, -at), to revive, quicken to life.
    återtän|da (-de, -t), to rekindle.
    återställ|a (-de, -t), to restore.
    återvän|da (-de, -t), to return.
    åtskilj|a (-de, -t), to separate.
    åtsporde, see åtspörja.
    åt|spörja (-sporde, -sport, -spord), to question, ask.

    Ä.

    ädel, noble.
    ädelsten (-en, -ar), precious stone.
    äg|a (-de, -t), to own, possess.
    ägare (-n, --), owner.
    ägg (-et, --), egg.
    ägn|a (-ade, -at), devote, dedicate.
    ägor, no sing., possessions, estate.
    älg (-en, -ar), elk.
    älsk|a (-ade, -at), to love.
    älskare (-n, --), lover.
    älskling (-en, -ar), darling.
    älskog (-en), love.
    älv (-en, -ar), river.
    älv|a (-an, -or), elf.
    älvkung (-en, -ar), elf king.
    än, yet, then, ever; om --, even if.
    än ... än, now ... now, either ... or.
    änd|a (-n, -r), end.
    ändå, anyway.
    änk|a (-an, -or), widow.
    ännu, yet.
    äntligen, final.
    äntring (-en), boarding.
    äpple (-t, -n), apple.
    är, see vara.
    ära (-n), honor, glory.
    är|a (-ade, -at), to honor.
    ärende (-t, -n), errand.
    ärlig, honest.
    ärrig, scarred.
    ärv|a (-de, -t), to inherit.
    ätt (-en, -er), family, tribe.
    ättartal (-et, --), descent, ancestry.
    ättefar, ättefader, progenitor.
    ättehög (-en, -ar), tribal funeral mound.
    ättekull|e (-en, -ar), barrow, ancestral grave.
    ättelängd (-en, -er), pedigree.
    även, even, also.
    äventyr (-et, --), adventure.
    ävenväl, also, likewise.

    Ö.

    ö (-n, -ar), island.
    öde (-t, -n), fate.
    öde, deserted, waste.
    ödslig, desolate.
    öga (-t, ögon), eye.
    ögonblick (-et, --), moment.
    ök|en (-nen, -nar), desert.
    öl (-et), ale.
    öm, tender.
    ömk|a (-ade, -at), to pity.
    ömkan, indecl., compassion, pity.
    öppen, open, frank.
    öppn|a (-ade, -at), to open.
    öra (-t, öron), ear.
    örn (-en, -ar), eagle.
    örneving|e (-en, -ar), eagle's wing.
    ös|a (-te, -t), to pour.
    öster (-n), east.
    österut, in the east, towards the east.
    östervåg (-en, -or), Eastern sea, Baltic.
    över, over, above, across.
    överallt, everywhere.
    över|flyga (-flög, -flugit, -flugen), to spread over.
    överflöd (-et), plenty, surplus.
    överflög, see överflyga.
    över|giva (-gav, -givit, -given), to desert.
    överhand (-en), upper hand, mastery.
    överman (-nen, -män), superior.
    övermod (-et), recklessness, arrogance, pride.
    överpräst (-en, -er), high priest.
    överskygg|a (-de, -t), to overshadow.
    översåll|a (-ade, -at), to overstrew.
    övertalare (-n, --), persuader.
*/








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fritiofs Saga, by Esaias Tegner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRITIOFS SAGA ***

***** This file should be named 8518-8.txt or 8518-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/5/1/8518/

Produced by David Starner, Tapio Riikonen and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
